---
tags: [multithreading]
---

# Concurrency

Concurrency is an ability of the program to execute its control sequence
out-of-order or in partial order. This will inevitably cause
[Race Condition](202112061109.md)# due to the possible simultaneous access to
the same resource. The security might not be sufficient to guard the shared
memory from being exploited by an intruder.

That being said, designing a program with concurrency in mind will lead to a
**smoother workflow**, **cleaner architecture**, **clearer interface**, and
**better performance**, and allow more rooms for **scaling** and **performance
optimisation**. [The Pragmatic Programmer](lit/@Hunt1999.md) We can get rid of
time or order dependencies by inspecting whether there are tasks or actions that
could be happened in parallel with the help of tools such as UML activity
diagram. Thinking it in a linear order instead will definitely result in a
*temporal coupling*, that is, coupling in time, where *tick must happen before
tock*.

Hungry consumer model, advocated by [Hunt et al.](lit/@Hunt1999.md), emphasises
the use of services: independent, concurrent objects encapsulated behind
well-defined consistent interfaces, instead of favouring a central scheduler
among [consumers](202201301240.md)#. In this way, they will consume tasks from a
work queue without bothering others' business, and if they finished, they will
grab some more from the queue. Let's say that a consumer task get bogged down
because of large input data, others will just pick up the slack. It allows every
consumer to proceed data in their own pace.

However, such a design mindset will require all objects in the program to be in
a valid state at all time, at least when being called. Make sure that the
constructor leaves the object in an *initialised state* by adhering to some
principle such as [C++ Rule of Thumb](202202012316.md).

Application decomposition into several tasks is necessary for the concurrency,
and each task must be able to meet its deadline (schedulability). We can do this
by identifying the inputs and outputs of the system with the help of context
diagram, and then identify concurrency opportunities by inspecting properties
like *device dependencies*, *event dependencies*, *time dependencies,
*computational bound activities*, *functional cohesion*, *sequential cohesion*,
*specialised purpose tasks* etc.

Always look for a parallelism solution such as in #[this example](202202011649.md).
