---
tags: [networking, cloud, resource]
---

# Terraform Providers

There are several #[HashiCorp Terraform](202205041220.md) providers available
from HashiCorp either through official support, verified, or community support.
They can be downloaded from [Terraform Registry](202206072143.md)# as a
[Terraform Plugins](202206072154.md)# if needed and stored into the local
directory `.terraform/plugins/`.

We can use the resources brought by the providers by specifying the requirements
in a [configuration file](202206061645.md)# like below:

```hcl
resource "local_file" "my_file" {
  content = "Hello World"
  filename = "/root/hello_world"
}
```

We defined a `resource` block with two parameters: `local_file` and `my_file`.
The first parameter determine what resource should be use from which provider. A
typical format for the parameter is similar to `{provider}_{resource}`. The
second parameter named this particular resource. In this case, the resource will
be named as `my_file` upon creation.

**Note**: Different providers provide varying resources, and each resource has
different arguments which some are mandatory and some are optional.

The resource could use the values from other resource's internal variables using
reference syntax `${<provider>.<resource_name>.<variable>}` such as below:

```hcl
resource "local_file" "my_file" {
  content = "${local_file.other_file.content}"
  filename = ...
}
```

This will establish an **implicit dependency** of `my_file` on `other_file` as
#[HashiCorp Terraform](202205041220.md) able to recognise such relationship when
running `terraform apply`. However, in some cases, **explicit dependency** might
exist even though it is not being referred. As such, use the #[optional argument](202211242001.md)
`depends_on`, and defined a *list* of dependency the resource is relying on.

```hcl
resource "local_file" "my_file" {
  ...
  depends_on = [
    local_file.other_file,
    random_pet.my_cat,
  ]
}
```

**Note**: Write down the dependencies in the format of `{provider}.{resource}`.

The depended resources will be created first before the resources that depend on
them, and be destroyed in reversed order. Using the above example,
`local_file.other_file` will be created before `local_file.my_file` since it is
the dependency of the latter, and destroyed (using the command `terraform
destroy`) after the latter has been destroyed by Terraform. Otherwise, the
resource creation will always be in parallel if possible. We can fine tune how
could we handle the resource using [Terraform Lifecycle](202209272230.md)#.

We could put a constraint on the Provider's version used for the current
project. Normally, in the [Terraform Registry](202206072143.md)#, they will
provide the [configuration](202206061645.md)# to use the chosen version after
pressing the "Use Provider" button. It could look like the following:

```hcl
terraform {
  required_providers {
    local =  {
      version = 1.4.0
    }
  }
}
```

**Note**: `terraform` block states a global configuration throughout the
Terraform project.

To restrict the version furthermore, we could use comparison operator such as
`>`, `<`, `>=`, `<=`, and `!=` and add it in front of the version in a string
literal. In fact, we can put multiple comparison statements separated by comma
`,`. Other than comparison operator, Terraform has a built-in pessimistic
constraint operator `~>` that specifies a version or any incremental of it.

**Note**: `==` is not supported.
