---
tags: [c]
---

# Inline Function

A function with the identifier `inline` in C is called an Inline Function.
Inline Function makes no function call, instead they are like macros where the
place that the function called will be replaced by the function definition or
the code that is inside the function. Since inline function doesn't introduce
#[overhead](202203011139.md), it is great to inline short functions especially
[Pure Function](202202081524.md)#. Always prefer Inline Function over
function-like macro.

When using in a large codebase, compiler often compile source code into a single
translation unit (TU). Inline Function, peculiarly in the header file, will
avoid multiple symbol definition errors if it is used across multiple TUs, which
means that pointers to such function in TUs will be considered as equal. We can
say that Inline Function is **visible** to all TU. Furthermore, when one TU
doesn't call the Inline Function, the compiler will recognise it and will not
add in the code into that TU, which will reduce the size of that particular TU.

Sometimes, we want to force the Inline Function to be compiled with the TU
instead of omitted by default when not called. This could be done by using a
compatible function declaration (almost identical to the Inline Function) with
*omitted parameter name* in the source file (of course we need to include the
header file that contain that function). Pay attention to the variable(s) name
inside the function scope. It is wise to use unique prefix for the variable(s)
in order to avoid weird macro expansion.

That being said, add the identifier `inline` to a function only if it is
relatively stable, that is not many changes will be expected to be done on this
function. If there is a change on the function, the compiler will rebuild all TU
that called the function which can increase the compilation time. Additionally,
Inline Function can't access any variable or function that has identifier
[static](202202111824.md) although passing the pointer of them to the function
is fine.
