---
tags: [networking]
---

# Routing Protocol

Routing Protocol is a series of messages that #[Router](202207061800.md) used to
exchange information about whether particular links are up or down, and about
other next-hop routers in the network. It is often used for dynamic routing to
*discover remote networks* and ease the administrative and operational overhead
of static routing. That being said, it doesn't replace static routing in network
administration, and it does burn more router resources such as CPU cycles,
memory, and link bandwidth. Furthermore, it is less secure compare to static
routing since the discovering phase includes reconnaissance on its neighbours'
information.

A Routing Protocol usually (not always) consists of *data structures*,
*algorithm*, and *routing protocol messages* (to discover neighbours and
exchange routing information).

It will aid the router's decision-making in determining the *optimal routing
path* by using the metrics (dictated by the network administrator): *hop count*
(how many routers should be gone through by a packet to reach its destination),
*delay* (how much time is needed for a packet to reach its destination),
*reliability* (measures the bit error rate of the network links), *Maximum
Transmission Unit (MTU)* (the maximum message length or packet size allowed on
the path), *load* (traffic utilisation on a link, the lower, the better) and
*cost* (arbitrary, possibly a combination of other metrics mentioned).

The determined routing path will be later stored in the #[Routing Table](202210112056.md)
of the #[Router](202207061800.md). If there is a topological change in the
network, the protocol will update the routing table accordingly and advertise it
to its neighbours.

Depending on [where](202207071149.md) does the Routing Protocol is used, it can
be categorised into two main types:
- [Interior Gateway Protocols (IGP)](202207071157.md)#
- [Exterior Gateway Protocols (EGP)](202207071158.md)#
