---
tags: [networking, tree, graph]
---

# Spanning Tree Protocol (STP)

STP is a #[Data Link Layer](202206131651.md) protocol designed to run on
[Bridge](202207051851.md)# and [Switch](202207051907.md)# in order to prevent
#[Network Loop](202207081644.md) inside the network. It has been standardised by
the [Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE)](202210010828.md)
with 802.1d.

The mechanism behind it is to activate only one network path at a time and allow
several standby paths, which by default will be blocked, especially if it causes
a loop, and brought up one of them when the activated network link is down. The
protocol will maintain a [Spanning Tree](202207081445.md)#, which includes all
the switches in the [LAN](202207051554.md), using bridge protocol data units
(BPDU) to exchange information between the switches. All switches in the
spanning tree will elect a root switch to become the focal pointer for the
network by selecting the one with the smallest ID (though the network
administrator can arbitrarily dedicate a root switch).

According to the rules defined in 802.1d, all ports on the root switch must be
in a forwarding state. Others will determine whether the port is the closest to
the root (determining root port), and decide to put it in a forwarding state. If
nonroot switches occupy a common network segment, they must negotiate with each
other to decide who has the shortest path to the root (designated port) and put
it in a forwarding state. All other ports for the nonroot switches that
connected to other switch or bridge will be in blocking state. After that, the
switches will periodically send out a BPDU to indicate that they are still
alive. 

When a port first become active, it will not be put immediately into forwarding
state to avoid causing the network loop. According to 802.1d, it will go through
3 states sequentially: *listening* (the switch transmits and receives BPDUs to
determine the state of the spanning tree), *learning* (continue listening, plus
receives traffic and begins building a bridge table based on the source MAC
addresses of the traffic), and *forwarding*. The first two stages take 15
seconds each by default, which is 30 seconds in total. To speed it up, try
[Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol (RSTP)](202207122007.md)# instead.

Since each [Virtual LAN (VLAN)](202207061741.md)# on a switch had to have its
own root, it scales real bad with switches with a lot of VLANs. The alternative
of it is [Multiple Spanning Tree Protocol (MSTP)](202207122011.md)# and
[Per-VLAN Spanning Tree (PVST)](202212311139.md)#.
