---
tags: [test]
---

# Unit Testing

Unit test is codes that exercise a module (exactly one) and compare the result
of it to the expected output (correct or erroneous data). The testing should be
done in an *isolated environment* (controlled conditions) where we'll check the
return value of the component against known values or results from previous runs
of the same test ([Regression Testing](202206201335.md)) to find out any error
computations, incorrect comparisons, or improper control flow. Important control
paths are tested to uncover errors within the scope of the tested module. Try
not to test many things like logical decisions in a single test case.

A typical structure for unit testing is to have a *driver* and several *stubs*.
The driver accepts test case data, passes them to the component to be tested,
and prints out the results. Stub is responsible for replacing modules that are
subordinate to or called by the component to be tested. It uses the module's
interface, may do minimal data manipulation, prints verification of entry, and
returns control to the module being tested.

It is #[recommended](202206201159.md) testing the subcomponents first before
testing on the main module in which we'll have a composable testing facility.
However, don't test every public method if they are too simple to test as
advised by [Fowler](lit/@Fowler1999.md).

The tips on writing effective Unit Tests is to think of the boundary conditions
under which things might go wrong. It includes possible raised #exception.
Concentrate our tests there with a mindset of trying to break the test by
specifying possible special cases. This has a setback, of course, that is the
relative complexity of the test cases and uncovered errors is limited by the
constrained scope established for unit testing.

Sometimes, we do write some simple tests while debugging. **Don't toss away
them**. Formalise those tests into the test suit.

With unit testing in mind, developer will consciously design a program that is
[highly modular](202202041514.md)#. [Regression Testing](202206201335.md)# could
be implemented to further enhance the validity of the written unit tests to see
whether they are adhered to the specified requirements.
