---
tags: [memory, hardware, caching]
---

# Virtual Memory

Virtual Memory is an abstract memory that doesn't necessary corresponds to the
physical representation of the secondary storage such as [Random-Access Memory (RAM)](202403132022.md).
This means that virtual memory of a program can theoretically larger than the
physical memory. Virtual memory will map a physical address to the RAM into the
program address space (usually in a [table data structure](202404022105.md)),
where it will be translated whenever the program requests to access its memory.
The virtual address will be 32-bit on 32-bit system and 64-bit on 64-bit system.

Instructions use virtual memory address, which will be translated with the help
of memory management unit (MMU) into physical memory address. The use of virtual
address speed up [cache](202403191017.md) lookup in comparison to physical
address as the latter will be only available in later stage of the pipeline.
Therefore, it is common for virtual address tagging to be implemented in L1
cache level, and physical address tagging in L2 and L3 level (as they have
higher latency and more flush cost).

**Note**: Do not use the same physical address for more than one virtual address
in the same process.

Swap, a partition or a file in tertiary storage (HDD and SSD), will be used when
there are not enough available pages in physical memory for the mapping of the
program's virtual memory.

Although #operating-system can provide some support for it, it is mainly coming
from hardware such as second chip, discrete logic and memory management unit
(MMU) in CPU so that it can yield realistic performance. The best a programmer
can do, as Drepper suggests, is to use logical memory pages completely and use
page sizes as large as meaningful to diversity physical address as much as
possible.
