---
tags: [refactoring, oop, functional-programming]
---

# Refactoring

Refactoring is a process of rewriting, reworking and re-architecting of the
program's codebase without changing its observable behaviour. It is often used
to prevent or correct code [duplication](202206171004.md)#, preserve the
[orthogonality](202202041514.md)# of the software, update the code base on the
changes of requirements or better understanding on the underlying technology, or
[optimise](202203011139.md). The ultimate goal of Refactoring is to make the
software *easy to read*, have *all logic specified in one and only one place*
(no [duplications](202206171004.md)#), doesn't allow *changes to alter existing
behaviour*, and allow only *simple conditional logic*.

Refactoring speeds up the software development by making the process of
understanding a codebase easier. The code should be readable so the next guy who
picks up the codebase will not waste much time on comprehending the code before
becoming productive. This is with extra benefit where we can spot bugs more
easily as we tend to spend more time in [debugging](202203131236.md)#. Make the
code speaks its purpose with more clarity. But it might drag the
[performance](202203011139.md) due to indirection.

[Hunt et al.](lit/@Hunt1999.md) advised to refactor the codebase sooner than
later before the task itself grow more tedious and larger. Regular refactoring
should be encouraged as the drastic improvement on the design due to cumulative
of small changes on the project ([Fowler](lit/@Fowler1999.md)), and do not be
slave to the history. Be ready to replace any code in the project.

A hint to do refactor is when we want to *add function* (if it is not as easy),
*fix a bug* (because it is hard to spot a bug) and/or doing a *code review*
(especially with pair programming). A simple rule is "Three strikes and you
refactor", meaning if we've encountered the duplication or similarities three
times we should do a refactor.

However, Refactoring is not a magic cure to all troubles a software engineer
will encounter. It is not encouraged by [Fowler](lit/@Fowler1999.md) to refactor
an application that is highly coupled to the database schema. It is largely due
to the high cost of data migration. Try [Persistence Programming](lit/@Cobbs2022.md)
instead. Or instead build an intermediate layer between the object model and
database model, so changes happen in one model will not affect another.

The user experience should be taken into account before refactoring especially
for library developers and/or maintainers on published interface. The changes
must be made to be known, and if such changes are scheduled, the users need to
know when will that take place. [The Pragmatic Programmer](lit/@Hunt1999.md)

If starting from scratch is an easier approach, don't refactor. The sign to look
at is when the codebase doesn't work at all and is full of bugs which is
impossible to stabilise it. That being said, one could try to refactor the
software into smaller components with strong encapsulation, and make a
refactor-versus-rebuild decision for one component at a time.

Most importantly, don't do refactoring when deadline is coming. You'll not make
it in time with refactoring.

[Fowler](lit/@Fowler1999.md) suggested three rules for Refactoring in order to
preserve the codebase quality:

1. Don't add new functionality while refactoring
2. Set up self-checking [tests](202206201320.md)# for the soon-to-be refactored
   code
3. Only do localised changes which are small as it is less prone to go wrong

**Note**: Self-checking test should print out "OK" when it passed and a list of
failures otherwise.

**Note**: Don't add tests unless you miss a case.

As recommended by [Fowler](lit/@Fowler1999.md), run the tests that exercise the
code where refactoring is taking place so that it doesn't slow down the process.

There are some technologies that work around Refactoring process:
- [Refactoring Browser](202205281125.md)#
