---
tags: [networking]
---

# Domain Name Server (DNS)

DNS provides a mean to translate between #[IP Address](202206281021.md) and
domain name such as "google.com", "archlinux.org", "mmu.edu.my" etc, defined by
the standard RFC 1034 and 1035, usually done through the #software Berkeley
Internet Name Domain (BIND). It is done over [UDP](202206151759.md) on the
[port](202206151841.md) 53. If DNS is not available or disable within a network,
the hosts will not be able to request services with domain name and even loss
connection to the Internet entirely. Other than providing domain name
translation, DNS also allows name aliasing, which is useful for host or mail
server that has non-mnemonic domain name, and load distribution that contains a
list of IP addresses that point to the same domain name.

The working mechanism of DNS is fundamentally distributed as there is no single
centralised DNS server that is vulnerable to reliability and availability
issues. Local hosts usually requests DNS service from a local DNS server, which
could be provided by local [Internet Service Provider (ISP)](202209271141.md),
corporate, or self-hosted. The local DNS server then requests for domain name
translation on behalf of the host (this is termed **recursive query**) from
*root DNS server*, 13 of them which obtains a list of IP address to *Top-Level
Domain (TLD) servers*. TLD is referred to the domain name that has the suffix
such as org, net, com, fr, nl, my etc. The root DNS server inspects the TLD of
the domain name, and gives the IP address of the corresponding TLD server to the
local DNS server, which then requests for domain name translation from the TLD
server (this is called **iterative query**). The TLD server may or may not
obtain the IP address of the *authoritative DNS server*, the DNS server that is
maintained by the organisation that maps domain names to IP address(es). If the
authoritative DNS server is not know, the IP address of an intermediate DNS
server is returned instead. In the end, the domain name translation will be done
by the authoritative domain server which the host is intended to access. As you
can see, the process introduces potential layers of delays. This can be overcome
by DNS #caching.

Each DNS servers store [resource records (RR)](202302251909.md) that provide
hostname-to-IP address mappings.
