---
tags: [networking, operating-system]
---

# Mach's Interprocess Communication (IPC) Facility

Mach enforces that all objects to be local independent and transparent to the
user. This means that all #[message passing](202203021733.md) could be done or
seems to be done locally. The **[messages](202204231432.md)#** passed will contain
typed data objects, which compared to alternative where data in them will be
untyped streams of bytes, are easier to parse even if the byte ordering is
different from the sender and receiver.

To receive messages, every object in Mach, upon creation, must have a **port**
where those messages could send to and queue at. If the queue is full, the
sender could abort the send operation and then wait for its turn when the queue
is once more available for queuing, or the kernel could deliver that message on
behalf of the sender. The port creation share similarity with standard PID
concept in UNIX. If the port specified in [message](202204231432.md)# cannot be
translated into internal port data structure address, it will then be passed to
[202204231514](202204231514.md)# from [the kernel](202203021657.md).

Ports could be collected in a set called **port set** where they share the same
message queue. A port can only be a member of one port set at a time. When a
port needs to send or receive messages, these messages will be queued at the
port set's queue rather than direct communication between two ports. However,
port set *may not be passed in the format of message*.

**Port right** is a protection mechanism to *port* which contains the *port
name* and its *capability* (send to or receive from that port). It could be
given out from the creator of the object in the form of *messages*, where the
sender will be relinquished of that right, or to be revoked when the port is
destroyed.

On any given port, only one task can have receive rights, but many tasks could
have send rights. Upon revocation of the receive rights, tasks that hold the
send rights could be notified.

Mach IPC could be used for [thread](202112061056.md) synchronisation where its
mechanism is similar to [semaphore](202201291602.md)# due to the nature of queue.
