---
tags: [logic]
---

# Conditional Statement

Conditional Statement is a #[202204281244](202204281244.md) which states that if
one thing is true, then some other thing should be also true. It usually uses
the phrase "if ... then".

For example: If primate is mammal, then human is mammal. This can be denoted
using [logical operator](202205062025.md)#, $p \rightarrow q$. $p$ is called a
**hypothesis** or antecedent whereas $q$ is called the **conclusion** or
consequent. The hypothesis of the statement could be false, however it doesn't
imply that the statement is false. On the contrary, the conclusion could still
be true, which we call it as **vacuously true** or **true by default**. This
could be seen from its [Truth Table](202205061151.md)#. If the hypothesis is
true, then the conclusion must be true, otherwise it is a false statement.

If both hypothesis and conclusion are in their negation form, it is the
*inverse* of the original conditional statement, shown as $\sim p \rightarrow
\sim q$. When the conclusion and the hypothesis swap their places in a
statement, as in $q \rightarrow p$, it is a *converse* of the conditional
statement. The *contrapositive* of a conditional statement can be formed when
the hypothesis and conclusion in converse of the conditional statement are
negated, denoted $\sim q \rightarrow \sim p$. 

The contrapositive of a conditional statement is 
[logically equivalence](202205061231.md)# to the conditional statement itself.
Both converse and inverse form of the conditional statement is not logically
equivalence to it (the conditional statement), but they are logically
equivalence to themselves (converse and inverse).

There is another form of Conditional Statement which is more restrictive, the
*Biconditional*. It is denoted $p \leftrightarrow q$ which means $p$ *if and
only if* $q$. For example: Human is mammal if, and only if primate is mammal. We
can either say that "If human is mammal, then primate is mammal" or "If primate
is not mammal, then human is not mammal". Sometimes, the phrase "if and only if"
will be abbreviated to "iff". **Note** that the statement $P$ and $Q$ are
[logically equivalence](202205061231.md)# if and only if $P \leftrightarrow Q$ is
a tautology.
