---
tags: [networking]
---

# Hot Standby Router Protocol (HSRP)

HSRP is a Cisco proprietary First Hop Redundancy Protocol in cases of
[Router](202207061800.md)# failures which causes problems in routing. The
default hello interface is 3 seconds, and the default hold time is 10 seconds.

The command `standby {group-id} ip {virtual-ip-addr}` run in Interface
Configuration Mode will create a virtual router with the assigned virtual
[IP Address](202206281021.md)#. The IP address could be extracted using
[Variable-Length Subnet Masking (VLSM)](202210162049.md). Any other router
interface in the network with the same HSRP group ID will be viewed logically as
a virtual router. Within virtual router there consists of two entities: *active
router* and *standby routers*. There could be **only one** active router in a
group. Its responsibility will be to forward traffic on behalf of the virtual
router to the destination unless it fails. If the active router fails, standby
routers can come into play.

The election of the active router will be determined on the standby routers'
priority, which can be set with `standby {group-id} priority {value}`. The
highest priority standby router will be elected as the active router. If the
priorities are the same among the routers, then the one with the highest IP
address will be elected. However, if there is already an active router in
acting, standby routers will not replace it even with higher priority and/or
higher IP address. These all things will be reset once one of the router,
especially the active router, reboots. To let the router regaining its previous
position, enable it by `standy {group-id} preempt` in Interface Configuration
Mode.

**Note**: The priority of a router is defaulted to 100.

After the set-up of HSRP, the clients should set their gateway to the
corresponding virtual router's IP address, i.e., virtual IP address in order to
get the effect.
