---
tags: [logic]
---

# Universal Statement

Universal Statement is a #[Mathematical Statement](202204281244.md) which states
that certain properties are true for all elements in a set. It usually uses
*universal quantifier* $\forall$ which express *for all*, *for every*, *for
arbitrary*, *for any*, *for each* and *given any*.

For example: *All dogs are mammal* can be denoted in mathematics as $\forall x
\in H, x \text{ is mammal}$ where $H$ represents all dogs, which read *For all
$x$ in the set of all dogs, $x$ is mammal*. We can symbolise the previous
statement further. Assuming that $P(x)$ represents the statement *$x$ is
mammal*, we can rewrite the statement to $\forall x (x \in D \rightarrow P(x))$.

To [disprove this](202205062050.md), one could use
[Counterexample](202302281148.md), to show that at least one $x$ in the set of
$H$ is false. To prove that the statement is true, one could not avoid proving
that all of them are true, which is called the **method of exhaustion**. You can
see the difference between it and [Existential Statement](202204281254.md).

The negation of a Universal Statement is [logically equivalent](202205061231.md)#
to an [Existential Statement](202204281254.md). Formally, this means that $\sim
(\forall x \in D, Q(x)) \equiv \exists x \in D \text{ such that } \sim Q(x)$.
For instance, the negation of the statement "All books have a cover" is "There
is at least one book which doesn't have a cover". It is tempting to say that the
negation should be "No books have a cover", but it is enough to disprove the
above statement by just one counterexample.

Just like [Conditional Statement](202205062055.md), Universal Statement could be
said is **vacuously true** or **true by default** if $Q(x)$ is false for every
element in the set. In other word, if the negation of the Universal Statement is
false, then the Universal Statement is true, even if there is no element in the
set. Consider the statement "All books on the shelf has a cover". If none of
them are on the shelf, then the statement is true, as the negation of it "There
is at least one book on the shelf which doesn't have a cover" is false, as there
is no books on the shelf at all.
