---
tags: [operating-system]
---

# Named Pipe (FIFO)

FIFO is a #[Pipe](202210280908.md) that have names and directory link. And like
pipe, it is based on stream I/O model where there is no record boundaries,
meaning no data size examination took place there. This extends its availability
to other processes that are not necessarily related to each other to establish
an #[Interprocess Communication (IPC)](202210262136.md) channel between them.
Although the blocking on read and write when the queue is empty or full is the
default, we can specify it to be non-blocking (flag `O_NONBLOCK` or `O_NDELAY`)
which doesn't wait for data or processes. Non-blocking read and write in FIFO
also allow [Concurrent](202202011815.md) writing. Atomic write is guaranteed up
to 4096 bytes on Linux.

**Note**: Pipe cannot be used in [Network File System (NFS)](202302131659.md)-mounted 
filesystem as the data have to be passed between two different [File Systems](202202060057.md).

Creating FIFO can be done by calling the #[Unix System Call](202210062303.md)
`mkfifo()` (exported with the `sys/types.h` and `sys/stat.h` library) with the
name of the FIFO file and permission of the FIFO file passed in as parameters.
`open()` must be used on the FIFO file in order to have access to the pipe. An
example of FIFO creation is shown below:

```c
if (mkfifo("fifofile", 0644) < 0) {
  perror("fail to create FIFO");
  exit(1);
}

fd = open("fifofile", O_WRONLY | O_NONBLOCK)
```

There could be a case where after the client reading the FIFO has terminated,
the server still needs to wait for another request from the same or other
clients. However, because `read()` will return zero once there is no process
reading the FIFO file, the server has to `open()` the FIFO file again. The
solution is to keep the FIFO waiting for input by having one process always open
the write end of the FIFO. The server should open the FIFO in both read and
write (although the write end will not be used in this sense) mode separately,
meaning to `open()` FIFO two times with read-only and write-only mode
respectively.

FIFO can be created from the server to read from in order to process multiple
clients' requests in a queue.
