---
tags: [automation]
---

# Code Generator

Code Generator is an automation tool that could generate codes (programming
languages, markup language or SQL) based on a schema which can be in another
language or just [plain text](lit/@Hunt1999.md)#. divides code generators into
two types according to their role in the source repository: *passive* and
*active*.

**Note**: Even though there are many powerful third-party code generators that
can even produce the whole project skeleton, if one doesn't understand the
produced code, it is advised by [Hunt et al.](lit/@Hunt1999.md) to not use it.

## Passive Code Generator

A passive code generator needed only to run once. It is basically parameterised
templates which generates a given output from a set of inputs. The output of it
will become the source file (could be templates, source code, copyright notices,
standard comment block etc.) in the project, which can be edited, compiled, and
placed under [202208131616](202208131616.md)#, fully independent of the code
generator.

Other than being used to create a new source file, it can be used to perform a
one-off conversion among languages such as programming languages and markup
languages. Furthermore, it can produce lookup tables and other resources, such
as the output of trigonometric functions, compare to the expensive alternative
to produce them in runtime.

## Active Code Generator

An active code generator is often used as a bridge between two disparate or
different environments in avoidance of violating the
#[202206171004](202206171004.md). It typically uses schema, often in a
relatively simple [configuration language](lit/@Hunt1999.md)# or just
[plain text](lit/@Hunt1999.md)#, as an input, to produce the defined form into
two different languages (SQL and #cpp, for example). If there is a change in the
schema, the result will reflect the change made, and produce the respective
output.

**Note**: Due to the nature of active code generator, it is advised to run it
every time during the build process. Integrate it into the build system.
