---
tags: [networking]
---

# Cisco OSPF Router Configuration

To enable #[Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)](202211101623.md) to a
#[Cisco router](202210012232.md), run the command `router ospf {process-id}` to
enter Router Configuration Mode with the process ID ranging from 1 to 65,535. A
[Router](202207061800.md)# can run multiple OSPF interfaces (differ by the
process ID) at the same time.

By default, the router configured with OSPF will have an OSPF router ID with the
highest IP address on an active interface. However, it is advised to manually
configure the router ID using the command `router-id {ip-address}` as manually
configured router ID has the highest precedence over any methods that configure
a router ID. We can also create a router ID by assigning an [IP Address](202206281021.md)#
with subnet mask `255.255.255.255` to the loopback 0 interface.

**Note**: Although we are assigning an IP Address as a router ID, it will not
play a role in actual IP communication. It is only used in OSPF.

To enable an interface to send and receive OSPF packets, we need to specify it
with the command `network {network-address} {wildcard-mask} area {area-id}`
where the wildcard mask is derived from the subtraction of the subnet mask
`255.255.255.255` with the interface's network [subnet mask](202206280939.md)#.
The area ID specifies a group of OSPF routers that can share link-state
information. It is the mechanism to prevent flooding from affecting other
networks or [Autonomous System (AS)](202207071149.md). Instead of specifying the
network address, we could specify the interface's exact IP address. In this way,
we can just pass in the subnet mask quad zero or `0.0.0.0` instead of
calculating the wildcard mask without worrying about it. We can go even further
by execute the command `ip ospf {process-id} area {area-id}` inside each
interface of the router without typing out any explicit addresses.

**Note**: To include a [static route](202211051028.md)# in OSPF update, we can
run the command `default-information originate` in the Router Configuration
mode.

If there are multiple OSPF areas within a network, the command `area {area-id}
range {network-id} {subnet-mask}` becomes handy in implementing summarisation of
the networks in those areas.

Defining a passive interface to a LAN connection is necessary as to save up
bandwidth and resources, and reduce security risk on an OSPF-enabled router from
sending OSPF packets. This can be done in Router Configuration running the
command `passive-interface {interface-name}`.

The default OSPF cost in Cisco routers is using a reference bandwidth, usually
$10^8$ over the default bandwidth of the interface. However, with the default
value of the reference bandwidth, the cost of travelling in 10 Gigabit
[Ethernet](202207051550.md)#, Gigabit Ethernet and Fast Ethernet will be the
same which is not true. We can change it with the command `auto-cost
reference-bandwidth {integer}` where the integer is in Mb/s. `ip ospf cost
{integer}` can be used to manually adjust the cost of an interface in the
Interface Configuration.

Enabling MD5 authentication in an interface could be done with the command `ip
ospf message-digest-key {key-id} md5 {password}` first create a key and then
activate it with `ip ospf authentication message-digest`.

We can reload the OSPF process by using the command `clear ip ospf process` in
Global Configuration Mode. It is recommended to run it every time when there is
a change to the OSPF settings.

For debugging, we could use the command `show ip protocols`, `show ip ospf
neighbor`, `show ip route`, `show ip ospf interface {interface-name}` or `show
ip ospf`.
