---
tags: [networking]
---

# Virtual LAN (VLAN)

VLAN is a logical grouping of devices that breaks the physical boundaries among
them. This means that the devices connected to different
#[Switch](202207051907.md) or in different network can still able to be treated
as a single group. It abstracts the network grouping and allows hosts to be
treated as a single group based on their business role.

We can apply access rules and provision services to the users of same or similar
responsibilities without the need to change the topology of the network or
changing the [IP Address](202206281021.md). Furthermore, VLAN can also create
their own [Broadcast Domain](202207061732.md)# without the help from
[Network Layer](202206131702.md) [Network Device](202207051821.md) (modern
#[Switch](202207051907.md) and #[Router](202207061800.md)). Basically, we
could assign the hosts in a [subnet](202206280939.md)# to be in the same VLAN.
By using VLAN, we could have different broadcast domains even in a single switch
so that broadcast flooding affects only those in the same grouping. If a link
needs to handle more than one VLAN, #[VLAN Trunking](202212251342.md) will be
used.

We can configure VLAN [statically](202212070911.md)# and dynamically (using
[Network Management System (NMS)](202212211503.md)#, grouping based on the
[Media Access Control Address (MAC)](202206151451.md) of the device).

**Note**: Avoid assigning devices into VLAN 1 as it is the default management
interface for all switches which introduces several security risks as it is the
default interface to send out advertisements of [Cisco Discovery Protocol (CDP)](202211051036.md)
and [VLAN Trunking Protocol (VTP)](202212182201.md). Change the default VLAN to
any VLAN other than VLAN 1.

When it comes to deleting a VLAN, the best practice is to move the assigned port
or the VLAN member interface to default VLAN 1 before the deletion. This way,
the interface will still visible to the system after the deletion of VLAN,
otherwise it will be assigned to none of the VLAN, and it is hard to track down
those that are not.
