---
tags: [philosophy, race, moral, socialism]
---

# Racism

Racism is a form of social belief that groups of human will inherit their
ancestral attributes and one race can be superior to the others. Race, however,
is not a science but merely a social construct.

## Historical Development

Racism today is heavily influenced by the ancient society where slaves were
common. #slavery in Europe, North Africa and Arabic Peninsula was prominent and
was often justified by religion differences (Christian and Islam).

During Islamic Golden Age, African slaves (or Black slaves, as most of them have
dark skins) were pretty common and well known among Muslims. They developed a
belief that Black slaves were inferior to other people even to the other slaves
like Christians in terms of intelligence. However, most Islamic scholars and
officials invalidated such belief, and reinstated that enslavement could be
justified only during jihad.

Although unaccepted by the scholars, this belief was quite popular at the time
and then spread to the Iberian Peninsula, which at the time was still under the
Muslims' control. The Iberian Christian feudal regimes, Spain and Portugal,
started implementing much stricter religious control, targeted at Muslim and
Jews, after expelling Muslim regimes during Reconquista. They too, inherited the
popular belief that Black slaves were inferior where later such logic was
applied to Jews and Muslim.

During the colonisation of the America continent, Spain developed a caste system
which ranked races, Spaniard, Mestizo (mixes), Indian (America) and Black in a
hierarchy.

## The Rise of White Supremacism

England joined the adventure to the America in 17th century, but they quickly
faced issues in their colonies especially in Jamaica. Like in Spanish and
Portuguese colonies, they use Black slaves extensively. Additionally, they
implemented servant system in order to deal with the Irish rebels. Those
servants do not necessary treated badly and quite often they will be set free
after the end of the contract.

Even though they have some differences in their identities, Irish servants and
Black slaves often work together to rebel the
[repressive colonial rule](202203051018.md) by the English. The English officials
then start to segregate servants and slaves to quell the rebellions. They
categorised them into two groups: "Christian" and "Negro". Overtime, the label
"Christian" becomes more vague and eventually the label "White" replace its
function.
