---
tags: [oop]
---

# Publish/Subscribe Protocol

Publish/Subscribe Protocol is a model to control the event flows (changes of
data) in software using two entities: *subscriber* and *publisher*. The event is
used to signal changes from publisher to subscriber(s). From here, we can
conclude the publisher is the producer of events, and the subscriber(s) is the
consumer of the events that it needs.

The publisher doesn't need to have any explicit knowledge of the subscriber,
plus the subscriber(s) can have its own agenda different from others. That being
said, the publisher should keep track of who is subscribing to it, and call each
of them in turn and notify them if an event occurred. In case where the
subscriber(s) decides to unsubscribe from the publisher (it doesn't need that
information any more), it should remove that subscriber from subscribers list in
order to prevent it from getting notified.

**Note**: Avoid having a subscriber that has to handle more than enough or all
the events that they don't need. It will decrease the coupling since it doesn't
have the [knowledge](202206171004.md)# about them in order to interact with so
many objects.

There are many implementations of Publish/Subscribe Protocol: 
- peer-to-peer
- centralisation (software bus like [CORBA Event Service](202207041138.md)#, an
  object responsible to maintain a database of listeners and distribute the
  messages accordingly), and
- broadcast (regardless of registration).

We can further #[decouple](202202041514.md) the model using
[Model-View-Controller (MVC)](202207041054.md)#.

However, there could be two extreme cases by adopting this protocol: *push
model* and *pull model*. Push model happen when the publisher sends subscribers
detailed information about the change without determining whether it is
necessary. This might make the subscribers less reusable. Pull model is on the
opposite polar where the observer ask details after the minimal notification
from publisher. It is rather inefficient. These two model could be avoided if a
parameter of the *interests* that the subscriber needed is passed during an
update. That way, only needed details are passed to the observer.
