---
tags: [cryptography]
---

# Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange

Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange is a method designed to negotiating and passing
encrypted by #[Asymmetric Cryptography](202203221212.md) or
[Symmetric Cryptography](202209012153.md)# cryptographic keys over an insecure
network. The keys intended to be shared will not be transmitted in plain text,
and instead encrypted by a shared secret key which in turned generated from two
known prime numbers that have a special #math relationship to one another.

Both parties will retain their own private keys, with a pair of public keys that
is encrypted with their corresponding private keys. The encrypted public keys
will be shared to each other over an insecure channel. They will encrypt the
public keys (now it's not their own) again using the private keys, which will
resulted in same public keys that only both parties know. When both parties
obtain back their public key, they could decrypt it and obtain the opposite
private key. [^computerphile2017]

Express it in mathematical sense, both party will need to agree on the global
parameters, that is the information that will be made public: a large prime
integer or polynomial $q$ which should be at least 2048- or 4096-bit and a
primitive root or generator $\alpha$ which can be very small to improve
efficiency. Each party then generates their own private key $x_A$ and $x_B$
where both of them are less than the value of $q$, and later produces the public
key $y$ based on their private key by computing $y = \alpha^x \mod q$. Based on
the both party's private key, we could get the session key $K_{AB} = \alpha^{x_A
\cdot x_B} \mod q$ where Alice will compute $y_B^{x^A} \mod q$ and Bob will
compute $y_A^{x^B} \mod q$ to retrieve opposite party's private key by the
shared public key and their own private key. From [attacker](202209281128.md)
viewpoint, they need to compute either $x$, which is a [Discrete Logarithms (DLOG)](202210232232.md)
problem that is hard to be solved.

However, it is vulnerable to [Man-In-The-Middle Attack (MITM)](202210132201.md)
due to its lack of [Authentication](202210040915.md).

[^computerphile2017]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NmM9HA2MQGI
