---
tags: [networking]
---

# Remote Procedure Calls (RPC)

RPC is an [Interprocess Communication (IPC)](202210262136.md) that allows a
computer program to cause a subroutine or procedure to execute in another
address space (often time on another computer on a shared network). When a
programmer call RPC on another computer, the program needed is invoked locally
instead of relying on transmitted instructions over the network. It differs from
other IPC by having error handling, slower performance, and
[Authentication](202210040915.md). Side effects and global variables will not be
passed over the network since the server doesn't own the client address space.
RPC are particularly popular in building distributed application.

There are two entities involved in RPC procedures: *client stub* and *server
stub*. The client stub is responsible for getting binding of remote procedure,
parameters conversion, marshalling procedure arguments, and RPC frame dispatch.
The server stub is responsible for unmarshalling arguments, procedure
invocation, and result dispatch. The RPC works like this: Client procedure calls
client stub normally, then the stub build messages which later call the
#operating-system. The OS sends the messages to the remote OS, which in turn
hand in the messages to the server stub. The stub unpacks the parameters to
determine which server to call. After the execution, the server returns the
result to the server stub which is responsible for packing the messages back to
the client OS. The server OS receives the messages and sends them to the client
OS. The OS then returns the messages to the client stub, which then unpacks the
result that can be returned back to the client program.

**Note**: RPC is done by pass by-value only as two remote hosts don't have a
shared memory address to begin with.

An RPC call could face server not found, lost request, lost reply, server error,
network problem, server crash, or early client termination. A proper RPC error
handling should handle the mentioned errors elegantly. The most intuitive way to
handle them is by retrying the request message. By this, the server needs to
filter duplicate messages and may go further by keeping a history of results so
that immediate retransmission of results one the duplicate requests are
received.

There are several types of invocation semantics for RPC:
- *exactly once semantics* (every method is executed exactly once)
- *maybe semantics* (caller cannot determine whether the remote procedure has
  been executed)
- *at-least-once-semantics* (caller receives a result or an exception)
- *at-most-once-semantics* (caller either receives a result or an exception)
