---
tags: [xml, graphics]
---

# XSL Transformations (XSLT)

XSLT specifies a language definition for XML data presentation and data
transformation. It is used to transform an XML documents into other kinds of
documents such as [Extensible Markup Language (XML)](202305281742.md), HTML, and
text. The XSL document usually starts with the following two examples shown
below:

```xsl
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<xsl:stylesheet version="1.0" xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform">
<!-- OR -->
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<xsl:transform version="1.0" xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform">
```

*Note*: The output element can be specified with `xsl:output`'s `method`
attribute.

We can refer to a XSL file with the tag `xml-stylesheet` which share similar
syntax with HTML (`<?xml-stylesheet type="text/xsl" href="{xsl-file}?>"`).

The tag `xsl:template` with the attribute `match` (`<xsl:template
match={Xpath-expr}>`) can be used to match for a particular element.
Additionally, with the `name` attribute, we can name the template, which will be
called by `<xsl:call-template name={template-name}>`. Templates accept
parameters just like the functions in #programming-language, with the use of
`<xsl:param name={param-name} select={default-val}>`. Contemplating with the
`xsl:call-template`, we can pass on parameters with the tag `<xsl:with-param
name={param-name} select={val}>`. `xsl:apply-template` checks for template
matches on all the element specified in the `select` attribute
(`<xsl:apply-template select={Xpath-expr}>`).

We can refer to a value with the tag `xsl:value-of` specified in the attribute
`select` (`<xsl:value-of select={XPath-expr}>`). `<xsl:element
name={elem-name}>` creates a new element node with the specified in the
attribute `name`. Same thing to the tag `<xsl:attribute name={attr-name}>`, it
creates an attribute to the previous node with the specified name from the
attribute `name`. `<xsl:variable name={var-name} select={val}/>` can be used to
declare a local (declared within a template) or global variable (declared at top
level).

XSLT also allows the use of conditional statement and loop to enable more
complex template definition. For example, `<xsl:for-each select={Xpath-expr}>`
loops over all nodes in the node list of the XPath expression. `<xsl:if
test={statement}>` allows for conditional expressions such as `=`, `!=`, `&lt;`,
`&gt;`, `&lt;=`, `&gt;=`, `and`, `or`, and `not`. To test multiple conditions,
we can use `<xsl:choose>` in conjunction with `<xsl:when test={statement}>` and
`<xsl:otherwise>`, which is equivalent to an if-else statement in programming
language.

We can sort the elements alphabetically in ascending order with the tag
`<xsl:sort select={Xpath-expr}>`. To sort them in reverse order, we can alter
the value of attribute `order` to `descending`. To sort the elements in
numerical order, we use the `data-type` attribute which should be defined as
`number`.

XSLT has some predefined functions such as `count({Xpath-expr})` that can be
utilised to count the total number of input nodes in a sequence.
