---
tags: [history, islam]
---

# Civilisation

Civilisation comes from the advancement of material conditions (pembangunan
fizikal) and cultural enrichment (pembangunan rohani). From Islamic perspective,
it is advised to have both been developed in a balance way (umran). A typical
civilisation will have religion, settled area (usually fertile lands), improved
life quality, hierarchy, language, laws, and high creativity.

**Note**: Comparing to culture, civilisation last longer that the former and
could exist across the nation boundaries.

In the study field (ilmu ketamadunan), we develop the theories, basic concepts,
characteristics, and nature about civilisations conceptually, theoretically, and
abstractly. In this manner, it ascends the restraint of time (batasan zaman) in
order to understand the nature of civilisations. In contrast, if we study from
the historical aspect of the civilisation, we refer to the civilisation's
experience as a whole (its achievement, and rise and fall), and this of course
is limited by its present of time.

The study on civilisation is a lively, flexible, wide study that links between a
variety of disciplines. It has several components that we should take into
considerations, which are religion, philosophy, city structure, sociology,
anthropology, culture, science and technology, and art and literature.
[Ibn Khaldum Theory of Civilisation](202308082129.md) argued that human should
advance from nomad way of life (umran badawi) to settled lifestyle (umran
hadari).

Asian civilisation seems to put emphasis on religion compare to the West, argued
by the Islamic scholars. However, most western thoughts and buildings could be
seen been influenced by Christian characteristics, just that it has a rich
history of multicultural integration within the domain.

The rise of the civilisation could be credited to its strategic geopolitical
advantage, flourishing religious and cultural values, improvement on knowledges,
improvement in technology, and/or competition with other civilisation. Its fall
could be attributed to societal gap, cruelty, morality, stagnation, and/or
natural disaster. The differences between civilisation could be different from
the perspective of environment, family values, society or community, government,
economy, education, and fitness. Interaction between civilisations could be
happened between the same cultural group or other civilisations (stronger or
weaker).
