---
tags: [accessibility, networking]
---

# Access Control List (ACL)

An ACL is a sequential list of permit and/or deny statements, known as *access
control entries (ACEs)* on a [Router](202207061800.md). The router with ACL
configured acts as a packet filter inspecting the network packet pass through it
at the [Network Layer](202206131702.md) and decides whether to forward or drop
the packets based on the rules specified by the ACL. The *inbound ACL* applies
rules on the packets coming to the interface before they are routed towards
other interface (called outbound interface). In contrast, the *outbound ACL*
filters the packets after being routed regardless of their origin. There can be
only one ACL per interface, per direction (inbound or outbound), and per
protocol ([IPv4 Address](202206151453.md) or [IPv6 Address](202206281129.md)).

**Note**: The ACL can be applied on VTY port as well.

Based on the types of the ACL, the ACL are limited to filter packets based on
specific their characteristics. There are two types of ACL: **standard ACL** and
**extended ACL**. Standard ACL can only filter packets based on the source
[IP Address](202206281021.md) whereas the extended ACL can do that based not
only the source IP address, but also [IP protocol type](202206151223.md), source
[TCP](202206151232.md) or [UDP](202206151759.md) ports, destination IP address,
and destination TCP or UDP ports. These ACLs could be in numbered (1 to 99 and
1300 to 1999 for standard ACL, and 100 to 199, 2000 to 2699 for extended ACL) or
in named (with the convention to be written in capitalised letter) where lists
of entries can be entered. The extended ACLs usually placed near the source
whereas standard ACLs are placed near the destination. In [IPv6 network](202206281129.md),
however, only named ACLs are allowed to be configured in the network, which have
similar features to the extended ACLs.

In [Cisco Internetwork Operating System (IOS)](202210012232.md), we can
configure a number standard ACL with the command `access-list {number}
{permit|deny} {source-ip-address} {wildcard-mask}` or extended ACL with
`access-list {number} {permit|deny} {source-ip-address} {source-wildcard-mask}
{operator} {port-number or port-name} {dest-ip-address} {dest-wildcard-mask}
{operator} {port-number or port-name}`, or named ACL with `access-list
{standard|extended} {name}` (this will enter into access control list
configuration mode). The wildcard mask can be calculated by subtracting the
subnet mask from `255.255.255.255` where 0 indicates to match the bit where 1
indicates to ignore the bit. Additionally, `host` keyword can be used to replace
the wildcard mask `0.0.0.0` to indicate exact match. `any` is another keyword
that can be used to indicate any IP address and subnet mask. After defining the
ACL, we can apply it to the interaface with the command `{protocol} access-group
{number or name} {in|out}`. We can add description to the ACL by `access-list
{number} remark` or `remark` in access control list configuration mode in named
ACL. We can verify the configured ACLs with the command `show access-lists`. For
extended ACLs, operators such as `eq` (equal), `lt` (less than), `gt` (greater
than), and `neq` (not equal) can be specified.

For IPv6 ACL configuration, `ipv6 traffic-filter` is the equivalent to the
IPv4's `ip access-group` command. There is no need to calculate the wildcard
mask. Instead, *prefix length* is used to match the IP addresses. The default
statements `permit icmp any any nd-na` and `permit icmp any any nd-ns` allows
router to participate in the IPv6 equivalent of [Address Resolution Protocol (ARP)](202209301002.md)
in IPv4.

**Note**: There is an implicit deny at the end of ACL for traffic that is not
matched to the configured entry.

It is advised to configure the ACLs for the organisation based on its security
policy and prepare a description for ACLs on their intended functionality. Test
the ACLs on development or mock network first before implementing on the
production network to avoid potential costly errors.
