---
tags: [economy, socialism]
---

# Outsourcing

Outsourcing is an agreement in which a company hires another company to delegate
some part of the work to it. In such agreement, the client doesn't have
management control over the hired company on how and where a product should be
done. Several types of outsourcing, including *body shop outsourcing*
(temporary), *project management outsourcing* (whole project), and *total
outsourcing* (whole business function). Possible reasons for a company to
outsource some of their works when the work is resource intensive (high labour
or capital costs), subject to specialist areas, subject to dynamic market
conditions (costly staff recruiting and retaining), and subject to rapid
technology advancement with high investment. Offshore outsourcing is said to be
due to shortage of qualified personnel instead of the desire to save cost.

The performance of outsourcing could be measure in different metrics: response
time, performance reports, satisfactory performance statement, and penalties for
non-performance.

The benefits of outsourcing are access to world-class capabilities, improve
organisational focus, freeing capital funds, free management time, reduce staff
costs, increase flexibility, cost certainty (agree by both parties), improved
service levels, reduce capital requirement, and reduce risk. However, this might
result in long term commitment, require communication with suppliers, dependence
on suppliers, coordinating different suppliers, lack of control over larger
suppliers, require additional training, reduce flexibility, reduce quality of
service, high staff turnover, and poor project management.
