---
tags: [oop]
---

# Prototype Pattern

Prototype pattern is a [Design Pattern](202211221249.md) specifying the kinds of
objects to create using *prototypical instance* and create new objects via
cloning (copying itself). A common #design choice for prototype pattern is by
parameterised the user class to have the prototype do the cloning. The user does
not know the number of products under the prototype abstraction and instead asks
the prototype to clone the product on behalf of them. Meaning that the prototype
class must have the interface declaring the clone method and implements under
its children. User work with application-specific class without any necessary
modification on its side.

The Gang of Four suggested using prototype pattern when the system should be
independent of its product creation, composition, and representation and:
1. The class instantiation should be specified at runtime.
2. Avoiding class hierarchy of [factories](202303271021.md) parallels to that of
   products.
3. Instances of class can have one of only a few different combinations of
   state.

The main benefit of implementing prototype pattern is the reduction of number of
classes as there is no need for subclassing, which is especially true in
[C++](202302190651.md). Other than that, objects can be created by varying
values (via parameterised) and structures (via deep copying, especially in
classes with subparts such as [Decorator Pattern](202302232121.md) and
[Composite Pattern](202302101843.md)). Additionally, products could be added or
removed at runtime. Dynamic application #configuration could happen with the
implementation of *prototype manager*, which is a registry of all available
prototype by [key registration](202112122035.md).

In some cases shallow cloning is sufficient, but if the prototype has complex
structures, internal that doesn't support cloning, or circular references, deep
cloning should be the choice here since the clone and the original object shall
be independent of each other. If customisation of the product is needed, an
initialisation method should be declared separately from the cloning operation.
#resource cleaning must be done if necessary in initialisation.
