---
tags: [networking]
---

# Mobile Ad-Hoc Network (MANET)

MANET is a decentralised collection of *mobile nodes*, function as both hosts
and routers, forming a *multi-hop* [wireless temporary network](202302161710.md)
without the need of a fixed network infrastructure created by
[IETF](202210010845.md). In short, it allows mobile nodes, wireless links, and
multi-hop routing where nodes don't directly connected at [Data Link Layer](202206131651.md)
can communicate through [Network Layer](202206131702.md) routing. It is
standardised by RFC 2501 (MANET: Routing Protocol Performance Issues and
Evaluation Considerations), RFC 3561 (Ad Hoc On Demand Distance Vector Routing,
AODV), RFC 3626 (Optimised Link State Routing Protocol, OLSR), RFC 3684
(Topology Dissemination Based on Reserve Path Forwarding, TBRPF), the Dynamic
Source Routing Protocol for MANET (DSR), and Temporarily Ordered Routing
Algorithm (TORA).

Due to its characteristics, every node can be a router, usually with a single
interface, and a host at the same time, with the downside of having varying
channel properties such as capacity and error rates. Routing decision can be
done at the source (sender) or hop-by-hop (intermediate nodes). The routing in
MANET must consider information from both network layer and data link layer, and
doesn't work well with traditional [Routing Protocols](202207061815.md). Since
the nodes can have great mobility, it results in dynamic topologies which tend
to have more redundant links comparing to conventional routing model. Some data
link layer topologies in MANET allow asymmetric channel. In fixed networks,
MANET might have gateway for it, but mostly it is deployed in a stub network
where knowledge of other networks is not needed. It suffers from interference,
power inefficiency, and limited physical #security.

It is rather difficult to achieve good performance in MANET due to routes
change over time (node mobility), its priority to avoid long delays when first
sending packets and reduce overhead of route discovery and maintenance, and
wanting to involve as many nodes as possible to find better paths and reduce the
likelihood of partitions.

MANET is ideal in situations, like battlefield communications, mobile
conferencing, personal area network, emergency services, sensor networks etc,
where it is impractical to build a network infrastructure.

Several implementations of MANET are available such as NovaRoam Mobile Router,
Mash Networks, MobileRoute, AirCQ, and LQSR (Microsoft).
