---
tags: [politics, malaysia, race, socialism]
---

# Malaya Peninsular Politics

Before the reign of colonial powers in the Nusantara region, Malay Sultanates'
political system was based on absolutism (kuasa mutlak). However, after
[Pangkor Treaty](202207201017.md) in 1874, monarchs' power was severed
curtailed and restricted only to religion and custom while the rest of the
powers rest in the Resident System. Based on the Resident System, British
colonial government established Federated Malay States (Negeri-negeri Melayu
Bersekutu) in 1896, which includes Perak, Selangor, Negeri Sembilan and Pahang,
and Unfederated Malay States (Negeri-negeri Melayu Tidak Bersekutu) in 1909,
which includes Perlis, Kedah, Kelantan, and Terengganu, and later joined by
Johor in 1912.

United Malay National Organisation (UMNO), lead by Dato' Onn Jaafar, was
established on 1st April 1946 during All Malayan Malay Congress (Kongres Melayu
Se-Tanah Melayu) in Sultan Selangor's Club, Kuala Lumpur on 11th and 12th May
1946, in protest to the establishment of Malayan Union on 1st April 1946 by
British colonial government. Later Malayan Union was replaced by Federation of
Malaya (Persekutuan Tanah Melayu) in 1948. Alliance Party (Parti Perikatan), the
former body of National Front (Barisan Nasional), was formed between UMNO and
MCA to contest 1952 general election, and later joined by MIC. During this
period, consensus (muafakat), cooperation, and compromise formed the basis of
politics in Malaysia. Such tradition was challenge by several multiethnic party
such as Malaya Independence Party (Parti Kemerdekaan Tanah Malaya) founded by
Onn Jaafar and National Conventional Party (NCP) founded by Abdul Aziz Ishak,
and finally broke after the 1969 general election by Malaysian People's Movement
Party (Parti Gerakan Rakyat Malaysia).

**Note**: Gerakan initially had Malay support, but ultimately lost them due to
internal leadership crisis in 1941 after joining the Alliance Party.

After the 13th May incident, Alliance Party's membership was enlarged to include
several opposition parties such as Malaysian Islamic Party (Parti Islam
Se-Malaysia) and Gerakan in order to calm the public atmosphere. It later
renamed into National Front in 1974.

During GE-12, more than 20 parties participated in the election. People's
Alliance (Pakatan Rakyat) formed by Democratic Alliance Party (DAP), People's
Justice Party (Parti Keadilan Rakyat, PKR), and PAS declared their manifesto,
which are to change, new hope, and welfare state respectively. In contrast,
National Front played with the safe card with huge confidence, vowed to maintain
a safe, peaceful, and prosper Malaysia. Ultimately, National Front failed to
obtain 2/3 majority, losing KL, Perak, Penang, Kedah, Selangor, Kelantan local
governance to the opposition parties. Political observers termed this as the
2008 political tsunami.

After GE-14, the opposition parties successfully broke the political monopoly of
National Front which were maintained for 60 years.
