---
tags: [cloud, security]
---

# Cloud Security

Security team in corporates that uses cloud will lose the direct control of
systems applications, data security and other resources with the use of
[Cloud](202210012158.md). Therefore, we should instead concern about the
**protection of data at rest** (guarantee data
[Confidentiality](202210022150.md), [Integrity](202210022154.md), and
[Availability](202210022157.md)), **fine-grained access**, **selective access**
([Access Control List (ACL)](202302190738.md)), **user privacy** (based on
user's properties), **query privacy** (shuffled and rewritten on every access),
**query and computation integrity** (assessment of correctness, completeness,
and freshness of queries and computations), **collaborative query execution with
multiple providers** (data sharing), **[SLA](202311291026.md) and auditing**,
and **multitenancy and virtualisation**. For management, we shall focus on
**cloud governance** (workforce education, identity and access management, risk
and event management, and compliance audit), **security policies** (existing
policies, best practices, data on the cloud, exit strategy, cloud provider
negotiation accountability, data physical location), **service contracts**, and
**SLAs**.

Protection of data at rest can be implemented with four approaches, that is,
*[encryption](202209281121.md)*, *two can keep a secret*, *fragmentations*, and
*keep a few*. Fine-grained access can be done in two ways. The first is to query
directly on the encrypted data, but this operation requires complex execution.
The second one is by attaching to the encrypted data some metadata or indexes as
fine-grained information retrieval and query execution.
