---
tags: [unix, io]
---

# Unix Stream


According to [Ritchie](lit/@Ritchie1983.md), stream is defined to be a
full-duplex connection between a user's process and a device or pseudo-device
driver which could consists of several linearly connected processing modules and
is similar to a shell [Pipeline](202210280908.md), except that data flows in
both directions. The modules could be built and added by the driver or process
as a [multiplexor](202306261702.md) that sit in between the stream head and the driver. Modules in
a stream communicate mostly by passing messages to their neighbours, but don't
require access to the neighbours' storage unless for some conventional variables
used for [Flow Control](202209302245.md). A module provides at most one entry
point, called routine, to each neighbour, to accept messages from them. In
general, the medium of communication between the user, the stream, and the
device driver is through messages. The driver's modules are connected to the
stream automatically when the device driver is opened, and attached dynamically
by request of the user's program. Stream processing modules are symmetrical in
that their read and write interfaces are identical.

Each stream processing module consists of a pair of [Queues](202112101836.md),
one for each direction. A queue data structure contains the data queue, two
routines, and some status information (includes a pointer to the next queue
downstream, various flags, and a pointer to additional state information require
by the instantiation of the queue). The two routines are put procedure and
service procedure. The former is called by its neighbour to place messages on
the data queue, the latter is scheduled to execute whenever there is work for it
to do. Queues are allocated in such a way that the routines associated with one
half of a stream module may find the queue associated with the other half.
