---
tags: [economy, devops]
---

# Horizontal Integration

In business aspect, horizontal integration is a [System Integration (SI)](202303242149.md)
intends to motivate the cooperation of units within the enterprise for
operations effectiveness which puts emphasis on enabling different units to
cooperate on the same task simultaneously. Company that deploys this method
often takes over another companies whose product and production level are
similar to its own. This provides the benefits of economies of scale due to the
increase scale of the production over the same product, thus increasing the
production effectiveness. However, it could create monopoly, increase the size
of the company to the point that it is hard to manage, and the lack of synergy
within which could drive down the value of the company.

From system perspective, horizontal integration integrates data,
functionalities, and processes based on the core business procedure of the
organisation to make cross-functional cooperation possible. This could be done
by implementing a specialised subsystem such as **enterprise service bus** that
translate the interface to another interface that the other subsystems, whose
directly connected to such subsystem, can understand. It also can be used as a
communication bridge between subsystems which cuts the number of connections or
interfaces needed and the integration costs while also provides extreme
flexibility. It is common to just replace a subsystem with another subsystem
without affecting the whole system since we only need to port the new
subsystem's interface to the enterprise service bus.
