---
tags: [hygiene, cpp, resource, multithreading]
---

# C++ Hygiene

To have a good quality of [C++](202302190651.md) code, Sean Parent [^parent2013]
suggested eliminating the use of:
- raw loop
- raw synchronisation primitives like [Mutex](202112061117.md), [Atomic Variable](202202012051.md),
  [Semaphore](202201291602.md), and memory fence
- raw pointer, that is the object that implies ownership (e.g. `unique_ptr<>`
  and `shared_ptr<>`)

While inside a function, if the function does much more that just a loop, it is
rather difficult to reason about and prove its post conditions. This is what
Parent called a raw loop, the loop that does more that it should. Such practice
is error-prone and likely to fail under non-obvious conditions, introducing
non-obvious #performance problems, and complicates reasoning about surrounding
codes. The cure for the raw loop is to use existing [STL](202202241717.md)
algorithms like those in [C++ Range](202304241142.md), implement known algorithm
as general function, or invent a new algorithm that is simple. We have to keep
the loop body short. If this is not possible, give it a name and
[refactor](202206032059.md) it into a function. The same goes to
[lambda](202203231113.md). Aim for interface symmetry, meaning that different
algorithm should look alike from the outside.

The reason not using raw synchronisation primitives is that we as human are
likely got it wrong in addition of sacrificing performance without knowing. We
should instead think in task as unit of work, done not
[concurrently](202202011815.md), but as separate threads that communicate with
each other. This means that the argument(s) to the task and its result can be
used for communication including the functions. For example, if a task has been
finished, it should trigger a task to execute the following steps in contrast to
have two tasks where one have to wait for the other.

Raw pointer typically damages the semantics of copy and assignment, and the
equality of the documentation, which leads to incident data structure (deep copy
is necessary which result in unintended disperse codes becoming data structure)
and thread safety concerns due to polymorphism. As such, we'll not able to
reason locally about the code. Parent argued that a shared pointer
(`shared_ptr<>`) is as good as a global variable, and it should be avoided
unless it has a `const` modifier to protect from modification from different
pointers on the same object. If shared pointer is necessary, create it via
`make_shared<>` which eliminates the extra heap allocation when using `new`
semantics. Pass the sink (to be store or return) arguments by value and `move`
into place.

In [polymorphic](202307101439.md) base classes, [Meyers](lit/@Meyer2005.md)
favours the use of virtual destructors in order to avoid potential partial
destroy of resources which cause resource leaks or corrupted data structure.
However, due to the huge cost of virtual function, it is advised only to use it
when it is intended to be used polymorphically. See also [Class Inheritance](202302042023.md).
Another suggestion from Meyers is to have the custom types behave like the
built-in types so that the interfaces are consistent across different data
structure to prevent confusion and misuse. We could enforce this with the type
system using `struct` or `class`, predefine set of values returned from static
function, `const` quantifier, STL smart pointer as return type, and custom
deleter pass to smart pointers.

Minimise casting as much as possible by replacing them with type-safe
[C++ Container](202202241719.md) or moves virtual function up to the class
hierarchy for multi-type usage so that every class within the hierarchy can
perform the same operation. If it is necessary, use new style cast such as
`const_cast()`, `dynamic_cast()`, `reinterpret_cast()`, or `static_cast()` and
encapsulate them inside a function.

Postpone variable definitions as long as possible so that it doesn't encounter
weird error. And unless the assignment has less expensive constructor-destructor
pair and performance is critical, variable should be defined inside the loop
body. Make sure the variables are initialised before they are being used to
avoid the undefined initialisation order for non-local objects like global
object, object defined at namespace scope, static object within class, and file
static object in object files. [Meyer](lit/@Meyer2005.md) proposes the
transformation of non-local static object into static function that return the
reference of that object which make the object into a local static object. This
doesn't solve the [Race Condition](202112061109.md), however.

See also [Exception Safety](202203241405.md).

[^parent2013]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qH6sSOr-yk8
