---
tags: [socialism, gender, family]
---

# 2022 Cuban Family Code

2022 Cuban Family Code is decided by 61% approval from the referendum
participants in 25 September 2022, which then codified into Cuban laws in 6 June
2022. It is intended to replace the legacy family code in 20th century that
assumed nuclear family structure with heterosexual married couple to meet the
current community situation on the Cuban ground. According to a survey[^dsa-yt],
half of the Cuban household are headed by women and 30% of the children are
living with their grandparents. Further, there are the rising trends of couple
living together without going through marriage and both adults working outside
the home.

This family code expands the definition of family to cover same-gender parents,
chosen (not based on biological relationship), and other family members
including stepparents and surrogate mother family. Those who involving in caring
for disable people can be considered as part of the family too. In the principle
to free the family life from domestic violence, it outlaws corporal (physical)
punishment[^peopledispatch] in a household, establishes mutual-responsibility
between parents and children, and the recognition of domestic labour, which has
to be compensated upon divorce. The parents can freely choose whatever surname
should their descendants adopt. Moreover, it declares the right of body
ownership to [women](202203121058.md) including the right of abortion.

The 2022 Cuban Family Code has gone through the [popular consultations](202204211120.md)
(unions, workplaces, local government, committee defence of the revolution's,
and Communist Party of Cuba's cells) where they can strike amend or add into law
proposal which later could be rejected or accepted when it was translated into
transcripts. In later stage, the state government met with and seek consult from
advocacies with different agendas. Particularly, Cuban churches being the main
opposition to the family code.

[^dsa-yt]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dg2QxYK2Wyc

[^peopledispatch]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s5AJPNGYzkw
