---
tags: [socialism, philosophy, economy]
---

# On Distributism

After reading [Rushkoff's book](lit/@Rushkoff2016.md), I got introduced to the
philosophy of distributism. Distributism is an economic system where the power
is available throughout the network and be granted to the smallest possible
nodes, such as guilds, communities, businesses, or family, in everywhere at
once. It opts to establish a precondition for a healthy marketplace to have the
widest possible distribution of means of production by the means of value
creation distribution (commodities local circulation), rejection of infinite
growth, collective ownership (particularly worker-own corporate), and human
agency. The clear difference between distributism and socialism is that the
latter is aiming for the conversion of privatised means of production into
[common properties](202204211305.md) instead of collective privatisation and the
establishment social consumption fund for equal distribution according to labour
performance. Distributists are aware of the harmful nature of capitalism that
creates unjustified wealth and benefits disparity between community and
corporate and its expansionist core, they naively hope that the ruling class,
particularly those of corporate executives, will help in transforming capitalism
to reduce the harm. Such belief is utopia in nature.

Strangely enough, they often advocate the revival of the so-called
craftsmanships' value and artisanal production mode which is insufficient for
modern society even if it might ease the environmental pressure. Even though
they successfully acknowledge that the excessive consumerism is the underlying
problem of environmental issues, such reactionary thinking is rather backwater
and non-creative. The solution is rather simple, to produce enough necessary
commodities instead of luxurious items and distribute to the community through
the commonly owned means of production. There's no need of a weird fetish on
artisanal value and a renaissance for that. This craftsmanship admiration
resulted in thinking that a reduced form of capitalism that respect labour
practices is acceptable even though earning without value creation (through
dividend) is still allowed in this economic system. Why shouldn't we have
earning only when we create value to the community? That being said, I should
give them the credit of their acknowledgment on labour and resources are a valid
form of investment, which is similar that of from [Islamic Banking](202303201150.md).

Though interesting to read, the narrative from Rushkoff it was the fact that the
aristocracy usurped the means of production and centralised it to keep their
privilege and wealth untouched from the peasants and eventually from the
proletarian. If that was the case, the examples of French bankruptcy and its
eventual revolution, the expulsion of old Tories from being a significant
English political force, and Russian February Revolution didn't fit in this
narrative albeit their significance in transforming feudal society into
[capitalist state](202204202040.md). Through historical observation and
evidence, we know that the kings and aristocracy did in fact resisted the rise
of the capitalist forces from taking away the state apparatus instead of
co-opted for their purpose. The distributists fail to see the tendency of
capitalism to [concentration](202203051018.md), and instead thinking that they
can transform capitalism into a decentralised bazaar. Such attempt will
ultimately drive into its demise. At least they do recognise that by simply
applying decentralism doesn't guarantee equitable distribution.

Nevertheless, they see through the disastrous effects of #algorithm influence in
creating uneven opportunity and the economic growth in capitalism is actually
relying on unstable credit system. They encourage the use of local currency
based on labour, time, or favour (goods and services) that only peg to itself.
The idea of the economy system should be based on the velocity of value exchange
instead of extraction or money hoarding should be incorporated into socalist
philosophy. The future money used in socialist society will not be based on
scarcity, and instead on its transaction frequency. This will encourage the
cooperation between community members instead of participating in zero-sum game
with no apparent ending.
