---
tags: [cloud]
---

# Cloud Infrastructure

[Cloud](202210012158.md) infrastructure has several mechanisms in order to build
up a functional cloud environments for the clients. These mechanisms include
**logical network parameter**, **virtual server**, **cloud storage device**,
**cloud usage monitor**, **resource replication**, and **ready-made
environment**.

Logical network parameter (LNP) provides the isolation of a network environment
from the rest of a communications network. A virtual network boundary is
established which can encompass and isolate a group of cloud-based IT resources
that may be physically distributed across different geographical location. It is
usually achieved by *virtual firewall* and *virtual network* ([Virtual LAN (VLAN)](202207061741.md)).

Virtual server is a [Virtual Machine (VM)](202204071131.md) that runs
virtualisation software on it. The server instances are typically created in
cloud storage device.

A cloud storage device represents storage devices that are design specifically
for cloud-based provisioning. [Virtualisation](202311161439.md) technology is
generally used for storage devices in order to have a unified view on the
storage. As such, the cloud provider is able to provide fixed-increment capacity
allocation in support of the pay-per-use mechanism. Data can be grouped into
*files*, *blocks*, *datasets/records*, or *objects*. The cloud provider could
use *network storage interfaces*, *object storage interfaces*, or *database
storage interfaces* for the data access. Network storage interface makes the
storage devices in compliance with the industry standard protocols like
[SCSI](202202041945.md) for storage blocks, Server Message Block (SMB) or Samba
on Linux, Common Internet File System (CIFS), and [Network File System (NFS)](202302131659.md).
Object storage interface, like SNIA's CDMI, treat data as objects, and is
accessible via REST API or web service-based cloud services using HTTP as the
prime protocol. Database storage interface supports query language and basic
storage operations via API or administrative user-interface.

Cloud usage monitor is responsible for collecting and processing IT resource
usage data. It can be implemented in different formats, such as *monitoring
agent* (intermediary, event-driven, resides along existing communication paths),
*resource agent* (event-driven interactions with specialised resource software),
and *polling agent* (polling IT resources via sampling the status of an external
device).

Ready-made environment mechanism is a defining component of the
[Platform as a Service (PaaS)](202310311815.md) cloud delivery model that
represents a pre-defined, cloud-based platform comprised of a set of already
installed IT resources, ready to be used and customised by a cloud consumer.
