---
tags: [economy, socialism, politics, geography]
---

# Globalisation

Globalisation, defined by N. Lyman et al., is the rapid growth of
interdependency and connection in the world of trade and finance. However, there
are other trends driven by the same explosion of technological capability that
have facilitated the financial changes. Warwick University defines it as where
the goods, services, money, people, information, effects on the international
order as well as less tangible things such as ideas, behavioural norms and
cultural practices. CSGR gives the two definitions of globalisation: (1) the
emergence of a set of sequences and processes that are increasingly unhindered
by territorial or jurisdictional barriers and that indeed enhance the spread of
transborder practices in economic, political, cultural, and social domains, and
(2) a discourse of political and economic knowledge offering one view of how to
;make the post-modern world manageable. David Loy presents an alternative
definition: Globalisation is a complex set of developments: economic, political,
technological, and cultural. It refers to the interconnectedness of human
activity on a global scale, to the unprecedented flows of capital and labour,
technology skills, ideas, and values across state and national boundaries, but
in ways which neither states nor nations can adequately control.

Based on these definitions, we realise that globalisation is a collective
process of global conduction of object in different kind of human activity,
physical or social. It could be analysed from economic, political, cultural,
religious, intellectual, and demographic dimension.
