---
tags: [islam, history, war]
---

# Second Fitna

Second Fitna (second Muslim civil war) broke out during the reign of Yazid I bin
[Muawiyah](202302241557.md) and ended in the conclusive defeat of Abdullah bin
Zubayr by Abd al-Malik bin Marwan. It broke out due to the unpopular nomination
of Yazid as the successor of Muawiyah, instead of the son of [Caliph Ali](202302241134.md),
Hussein. After Yazid I ascended the [Umayyad](202302241657.md) throne, Hussein
was killed in 680 on route to Kufah in Karbala, with the purpose of rebelling
against Yazid succession. Another contender to the title is Abdullah bin Zubayr,
who is the son of one of the prophet Muhammad's companion Zubayr bin al-Awwam.
He refused to recognised Yazid as Caliph, in which the latter sent in the army
that successfully defeated Zubayrid in Medina and besieged Mecca before Yazid
dead not long after. After refusing the besieged general Husayn bin Numayr
al-Sakuni's request to be nominated as Caliph in Damascus, Abdullah claimed the
title of Caliph in Mecca and allied himself uncomfortably with al-Tawwabin
(pro-Alid) in Iraq and Khawarijites (who assassinated Caliph Ali) in Hejaz.

After the death of Yazid in 683, his son Muawiya II ascended to the throne but
die in 684 due to sickness. A senior member of Umayyad clan, Marwan bin Hakam,
took over the throne as the forth Caliph of Umayyad. He reclaimed Egypt from the
hand of Zubayrid after the failed adventure of Abdullah to defeat him in the
Battle of Marj Rahit. The Zubayrid Caliphate further weaken as Abdullah lost the
support from Khawarijites due to ideological differences, which the latter
eventually deserted from the ranks and relocated to Basra and Al-Yamamah under
the leadership of Abu Talut. Marwan died in 685 and passed down the throne to
his son Abd al-Malik. After pacifying the resentments at Syria, he sent out a
force ventured to Iraq but crushed by the force of Al Mukhtar. Eventually, Al
Mukhtar declared Muhammad bin al-Hanafiya, son of the Caliph Ali, as the Caliph,
and couped against the pro-Abdullah al-Tawwabin. Abdullah eventually crushed Al
Mukhtar at the siege of Kufah, resulted in the death of Al Mukhtar in 687. Abd
al-Malik saw the ever weakening grip of the Zubayrid Caliphate, and marched
against Medina and later laid siege to Mecca. Abdullah died in the battle during
the siege of Mecca, ending the prolonged civil war between Muslims.
