---
tags: [relationship, database, oop]
---

# Relationship Set

Relationship set is a [Set](202204281446.md) of [Relationship](202304192107.md)
of the same type. A relationship instance in a relationship set represents the
association between [Entities](202304191954.md). Let say there is a relationship
set $R$, we can say that it is a [Subset](202204281535.md) of $\{(e_1, e_2,
\ldots, e_n)|e_1 \in E_1, e_2 \in E_2, \ldots, e_n \in E_n\}$ where $(e_1, e_2,
\ldots, e_n)$ is a relationship. If $R$ doesn't have any
[Attributes](202304200943.md) associated with it, then $\text{primary key}(E_1)
\cup \text{primary key}(E_2) \cup \ldots \text{primary key}(E_n)$ describes an
individual relationship in $R$. If there are attributes attached to $R$, then
$\text{primary key}(E_1) \cup \text{primary key}(E_2) \cup \ldots \text{primary
key}(E_n) \cup \{a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_m\}$ describes an individual relationship
in $R$. From here, we can see that $\text{primary key}(E_1) \cup \text{primary
key}(E_2) \cup \ldots \text{primary key}(E_n)$ from the
[superkey](202302101331.md) for $R$.

**Note**: Avoid assigning attributes of related entity sets as the attribute of
a relationship set.

Depending on the number of involving [Entity Set](202304191956.md), we can
determine the relationship set's degree. For example, a binary relationship set
is a degree 2 relationship set which involves 2 entity sets. Correspondingly, a
ternary relationship set is a degree 3 relationship set which involves 3 entity
sets. Binary relationship set $R$ can be expressed mathematically as shown
below:

$$
R = \{a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_m\} \cup \{b_1, b_2, \ldots, b_n\}
$$

Where:
- $\{a_1, a_2, \ldots, a_m\}$ are all the primary key attributes of entity sets
  that participant the relationship set $R$
- $b$ is the descriptive attributes of the relationship set $R$

For a $n$-ary relationship set $R$ without any arrows on its edges, its primary
key is the union of all primary keys from participating entity sets. If it's
with an arrow on one of its edge, then its primary key is the union of all
primary key from the non-"arrow" entity sets. See more examples in [Mapping Cardinality](202304290909.md).

$n$-ary relationship sets could be converted into $n$ number of binary
relationship, but with the cost of extra relationship sets, increase design
complexity, and storage requirement due to the need of creating identifying
attribute, and some constraints might can't be translated. From a design
perspective, $n$-ary relationship can express the relationship between entities
more clearly.

A recursive relationship set is formed when there is the same entity set
participants in the same relationship set more than once in different
[roles](202304191954.md).
