---
tags: [oop]
---

# Class Inheritance

Class Inheritance is a type of [Object-Oriented Programming](202202041514.md)
inheritance that defines an object's implementation in terms of another object's
implementation. It is different from [Interface Inheritance](202302042025.md).
Reuse modules with such method are called **white-box reuse**, as the internals
of the parent class are usually visible to subclasses, which is in constrast to
[Object Composition](202302051222.md). Although it is defined statically in
compile-time, the behaviours or the implementation of the object will be hard to
modified during runtime. And since the implementation of the parent class are
exposed to its children, it is often said that the inheritance *breaks
encapsulation*, thus increases the coupling between two objects (implementation
dependency).

Parent [^parent2013] strongly against the use of class inheritance in an attempt
to implement [polymorphism](202307101439.md). The reason is that inheritance is
an intrusive attempt that shifts the burden of usage to the type implementation,
which implies variable size, which in turn implies heap allocation. Heap
allocation forces further burden to manage the [object lifetime](202202012306.md).
Object lifetime management leads to garbage collection or reference count.
Moreover, inheritance introduces indirection and virtualisation, both have
significant impacts on performance just like the heap allocation does. It also
encourages shared ownership and proliferation (increase) of incidental data
structure (data structure spreads across different files), which leads to
synchronisation issues, breaks local reasoning, and further performance
degradation.

Better alternatives to class inheritance includes the combination of
[PIMPL](202307101457.md), `move` operator (see [RAII](202202012306.md), it
reduces the number of copy operation thus reduces heap allocation), passing sink
arguments (arguments to be stored) by value, and conversion of copy to
assignment. The client doesn't need to inherit in order to use the features
provided from the class and instead can utilise friend function, template, or
custom function to extend the class's functionalities.

[^parent2013]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bIhUE5uUFOA
