---
tags: [china, islam, history]
---

# Islam in China

China has the most populated Islam followers in its national boundaries,
primarily composed of Hui and Uighur people in Gansu and Ning Xia provinces.
[Islam](202308151847.md)'s influences are mostly coming from the land trade
route (the Silk Road) and sea trade route with its destination ends in Fujian
and Canton during the 6th century. The first Muslim that set foot on her soil is
the messenger coming from [Uthman bin Affan](202302241122.md). Two companions of
the prophet Muhammad, Saad Lebid r.a. and Yusuf r.a., starts preaching Islam in
China during that period in Zhangzhou and Canton respectively. Most Chinese
Muslim adopted the surname Shaa (æ²™) coming from the name of Saad, and it
remains one of the most popular surname among Hui people. Other common surnames
in Chinese Muslim community are Chau, Chien, Sun, Lee, and Ma.

The spread of Islam in China were come in different factors, mainly via trade,
marriage, political arrangement, and/or admiration.

There are more than 70 reviews focus on Islam published in China, with the first
one named Islam Monthly Review (Review Bulanan Islam) in Yunan. The longest
lasting reviews are The Crescent and The Light of The Crescent in Beijing, and
Islamic Review in Shanghai. Famous writers including Elias Wang Ching Chai and
Muhammad Yang Chong Ming as they had done the translation of al-Qur'an in
Mandarin and arranged the Arab to Mandarin dictionary. Others are Lee Yen Shen,
Lee Hsiun, Lee Shun Hsuan and Mi Fei.

China also produced some [Islamic Philosophers](202206282148.md) during the Qing
Dynasty. They are Ma Ming Loong, Sheikh Wang Tai Yu, and P'u Sung Ling.

Baba-Nyonya is a prime example of interaction between Chinese and Malay
civilisations.
