---
tags: [networking]
---

# Round-Trip Time (RTT)

RTT is the time from when a [TCP segment](202206151232.md) is sent until it is
acknowledged. In fact, we can simply calculate it out with the `ping` command.
For hand calculation, find out the estimated RTT by taking the average of sample
RTT. To know why this should be the case, we have to know that sample RTT for a
segment is the amount of time between when the segment was sent and its
[acknowledgement](202303141902.md) was received. Most [TCP](202206151232.md)
implementations take only one sample RTT measurement at a time, which means that
sample RTT is estimated for only one of the transmitted by not yet acknowledged
segments at any point in time. This leads to a new value of sample RTT
approximately once every RTT. Due to the nature of sample RTT, it can result in
fluctuation due to [Network Congestion](202209302043.md) or varying load on the
end systems.

**Note**: TCP never computes retransmitted segments.

The following formula shows how to calculate the estimated RTT where $\alpha$ is
recommended to be 0.125:

$$
\text{Estimated RTT} = (1 - \alpha) \cdot \text{Estimated RTT} + \alpha \cdot
\text{Sample RTT}
$$

However, with estimated RTT alone could result in exponential weighted moving
average (EWMA) that puts heavier weight on recent samples. This can be solved by
calculating the variability of RTT (deviated RTT) by estimating how much sample
RTT deviates from the estimated RTT. One property of deviated RTT is that it is
proportional to the fluctuation, meaning the higher the fluctuation, the higher
value is the deviated RTT. This will make the timeout interval (explain later)
more sensitive to the fluctuation in the channel. Calculate it using the formula
below with the recommended $\beta$ value as 0.25:

$$
\text{Deviated RTT} = (1 - \beta) \cdot \text{Deviated RTT} + \beta \cdot |
\text{Sample RTT} - \text{Estimated RTT}|
$$

From here, we can calculate the ideal timeout interval with the following
formula with estimated RTT and deviated RTT:

$$
\text{Timeout interval} = \text{Estimated RTT} + 4 \cdot \text{Deviated RTT}
$$

**Note**: This is to avoid having a value of timeout interval too large to
estimated RTT that will cause unnecessary retransmission and large data
transfers delay.
