---
title: "The Malay Labourer: By the Window of Capitalism"
authors: Zawawi Ibrahim
year: 2022
date: 2023-07-01 21:26
tags: [literature, socialism, anthropology]
---

# Summary

The book is an ethnographic approach to the study on Terengganu palm oil
proletarians' transition. It is important as the state's systematic expansion to
the one third of the total land acreage used as palm oil plantation. The author
defines ethnography as a historically situated mode of understanding
historically situated contexts, each with its own perhaps radically different
kinds of subjects and subjectivities, objects and objectivities. Ethnography
should be sensitive to political economy, as self-conscious emphasis on the
strategic and purposeful situating of ethography should be linked to the broader
issue of the political economy.

The book agrees the argument of Sidney Mintz in viewing plantation represents
the earliest form of industrialisation, that is a capitalist system of
production, as plantation is a window to the world the colonialist and
capitalist made. This could be seen from the Kemaman plantation in which a state
institution called State Economic Development Corporation (SEDC) established
the centralisation of the control of economic resources including 1 million
acres of land and later extended to industrial, commercial, and urban
development.

Utusan intelligentsia criticised the supposing "laziness" of Malay people,
especially those of from younger and more educated generation, doesn't work hard
enough in the plantation, which is in a sharp contrast to the Indonesian that
works even during important holiday like Ramadan and Adilfitri.

Historically, just before the domination of the [colonial powers](202203051018.md),
Terengganu aristocrats has already reorganised their economic resources in
anticipating such imminent situation. But those reorganisations inhibited the
rise of the bourgeoisie class as it only serves for their own status consumption
instead of siphoned back to the economy. The material condition for the rise of
the national bourgeoisie is further undermined by the colonial rules as the
political and economic rights of the aristocrats were dismantled by the colonial
government. The economic development of Terengganu was slow as it relied on
opium trade instead of the valuable trade goods like rubber and tin. The
situation was not improved even after independence as the federal government
reluctant to fund a state that was won by PAS.

SEDC huge dependency on the federal loans forced it to seek help from private
sector in order to develop oil palm plantation in Terengganu. This result in a
joint venture with Nadefinco, part of the Chinese, Singapore-based Sim Ling
Group. Much of the management are delegated to Terengganu Development and
Management Berhad (TDMB), one of the subsidiaries of Nadefinco. Although there
is a Malay and Indian dominated interest from Malaysian Cooperative Insurance
Society (MCIS), most of its members are coming from the West Coast high-income
background, thus the main beneficiaries are not the local population, but
instead work as wage labourers (around 3,000 to 3,500 of them), further
proletarianising the peasantry. Moreover, the joint venture continues the
colonial mode of land appropriation that doesn't benefit the peasantry, which
perpetuate the peasant-plantation conflict within the state. We could say that
Kemaman plantation is a result of interdependence and shared economic interests
between the Malay political power and Chinese comparator capital.

The author argues that there are two conditions needed to be fulfilled for
proletarianisation to happen: landlessness ("free" peasantry from access to or
ownership of land) and means to actualise the "free" labour into wage labour.

From investigating the Kemaman plantation's population, more than half (60%) of
the working population were landless, meaning they neither possessed their own
land nor family land. Even for those that were coming from the middle peasantry
strata (12% of them), a quarter of them often worked on other's land and half of
them resorted to non-peasant activities especially wage labouring due to small
land ownership (less than 2 acres of land). Not only that, both workers with
family land or own land, more than 79% of the population uncommitted to tend the
land they possessed. This phenomenon is defined as proletarianisation, where the
peasant producer is severed from their means of production and becomes dependent
on the sale of their labour power for the living.

In contrast to Federal Land Development Authority (FELDA), Muda Green Revolution
(MGR) brings productive capital instead of creating a variant of tenant-landlord
relations of production between peasants and government. This gives the rise of
the capitalist accumulation in parallel of capitalist intensification. The
phenomenon is further assisted by the introduction of Torrens system of land
registration since colonial era which classify peasants into different classes.
Torrens system legally facilitates the imperatives of capital towards land for
large-scale and more efficient production of raw materials. The transfer of land
for capitalist colonial sector and within peasantry trends towards to land
concentration and dispossession. Circulation capital also contributes to the
land dispossession through peasantry indebtedness via usury and credit.

Kemaman is underdeveloped since the colonial government favoured capitalists and
the half-hearted, disjoint, and niggardly efforts in improving peasant
conditions. Economic inequalities exacerbated by the introduction of new
property relations to the agrarian economy which resulted in land concentration,
middle peasantry possession of small and uneconomical plots, and extra rental
demands. Therefore, household reproduction became more pressing. The middle
peasantry can't generate enough surplus to sustain their lifestyle due to small
plantation acre (at most 2.5 acres, should be more than 3.2 acres). Another
interesting finding by the author is that owner-tenant peasantry generally need
50% larger area than owner peasantry to produce the same income. They either
have to turn to rubber or other cash crop, or non-farm work to have sufficient
rice supply for the household. In 1959, the rice-growing villages' major income
are coming from supplementary activities. According to Agricultural Census, only
37% wet rice farmers work full time. Although this strategy seems to be working
for them, in case of market fluctuations, they might have to fall back to sell
their labour as no subsistence production is available to them. In fact, the
author observed that more than a half farmers already seek for supplementary
income which is reinforced by tenancy and smallholdings. There was an undergoing
wage-labour transformation in the process in Terengganu in which the 17%
owners', 24% family farmers', and 11% landless's families deployed
proletarianisation as their social-economic strategy.

Zawawi pointed out that despite there was access to education, those who achieve
social mobility were coming from traditional elites which got themselves a
foothold in bureaucracy, whereas most peasants can only be a teacher, police, or
in arm force. The peasantry was mostly made up of low education attainments and
primary school dropouts.

The author observed that there is an overlapping in class and ethnicity within
the plantation.
