---
tags: [security, memory]
---

# Buffer Overflow

Buffer overflow on the stack may cause naturally occurring jump to a place with
specified return address. Pointer variable, located in the memory in front of
the overflowed buffer, could be reference and be written to. Normal variable
could be overwritten, which will result in permission escalation or wrong
results.

On machines where stack grows downwards in address space, stack-based array is
located below data generated for function call and data the callers put on the
stack. The data for the function call includes return address in most
[CPU architecture](202403151651.md). Assuming that return address is absolute
and the processor allow the execution. The attackers can redirect return address
to a code or payload where the computer execute it to redirect input and output
to a shell.

**Note**: If the processor has been implemented with a [Virtual Memory](202206251436.md)
handling, usually with a bit, it can determine whether the program content can
be executed.

The solution proposed by Drepper is stack randomisation with possible range of
downward adjustment which can lessen waste on memory and address space. Repeated
attempts by the attacker won't work since buffer flow will cause crash as it
tries to execute an arbitrary memory region and eventually trigger auto restart
on the program. Load address randomisation can be implemented too for writable
data memory, though it is mutually exclusive with prelinking. Heap's address can
also be randomised.

Another enhancement could be done is to make the stack non-executable. The
compiler and dynamic linker will check if the program needs executable stack.
Kernel may even map the binaries to the first 16 MiB of the program's address
space which all of them contain NUL byte. This makes string attacks harder.

For executable address, Position Independent Executable (PIE) can conceal its
address by randomising the program staring address every time the program is
loaded into the main memory. PIE is built with the GCC flag `-fPIE` where it
assumes all locally defined symbols are resolved locally. The programmer must
ensure all object files linked are also position-independent, that is, they
should also be compiled with `-fPIE`. This advice extends to the archives too,
though if its use also included for other purpose, using the flag might be the
wrong choice to have.

Further improvement to be done is to minimise the data buffer overflow coverage
by putting EFL data section just before `.bss` section. By this way, it will not
put other sections exposed to the attack.
