---
tags: [memory, performance]
---

# Cache Access Optimisation

[CPU Cache](202403191017.md) access can be optimised by **structure
rearrangement** and/or [**alignment**](202203061200.md). But, note that working
set size plays the most significant part in influencing cache access
performance. Therefore, one should make sure that the working set size is match
with the cache size, which is easy to do at L1 level since most L1 caches' size
is constant over many processor generations. This is not the case for higher
level caches though. In this case, the code must adjust dynamically to the cache
line size, and the program's [Requirement](202303251303.md) on safe lower limit
must be computed correctly by dividing cache size `size` with `shared_cpu_map`
(found in `/sys/devices/cpu/cpu*/cache/`).

It is recommended by Drepper to arrange `struct` elements in a way that those of
critical word are put at the beginning of the `struct` and the rest in a likely
accessed order. However, such reordering will not help if the object is not
aligned. We can state their explicit alignment requirement with
`posix_memalign()` and/or `__attribute(aligned(N))`. Note that these solutions
don't work for array as only the first element is affected.

`posix_memalign()` requires parameters of a memory pointer to the dynamically
allocated memory area, the alignment requirement, and the size of the memory
pointer. It comes with a downside where it could lead to fragmentation and/or
increase memory consumption. This is the same for `__attribute(aligned(N))` if
it is used on objects allocated by the compiler (in `.data`, `.bss`, etc., and
on the stack). If instead `__attribute(aligned(N))` is applied on a type (entire
`struct`), the compiler will assign the appropriate alignment for every element
in the type including array, though dynamically allocated element still require
manual alignment (`posix_memalign()`).

**Note**: Functions that have no multimedia operations don't need strict
alignment. GCC flag `-mpreferred-stack-boundary=N` where $N$ defines $2^N$
provides a mean to relax the alignment requirement which reduces the program's
binary size, though this is [architecture](202403151651.md)-specific and not
always applicable to all processors.
