---
tags: [radio, communication, p2p]
---

# Auto Packet Reporting System (APRS)

APRS is based on [Packet Radio](202410081117.md), and its set-up is similar to
that of packet radio (PC, [Terminal Node Controller (TNC)](202410081123.md), and
a radio). To enable tracking, a GPS component should be installed on the radio.
It is quite common in emergency and public service events' communication since
it is suitable for real-time communication due to its usage of 1-m protocol
which can update information immediately. Other features of APRS include the use
of generic digipeating with call sign aliases, the use of intelligent
digipeating with call sign to minimise network flooding, and two-way messaging.

An APRS packet typically contains information such as symbol, position, and
other types of information including weather condition, text message,
announcements, bulletins, queries, statues, and telemetry. It is formatted as
`{Callsign-SSID}>{ToCall},{Paths}:{Data}`. SSID was used for device
identification, which is now replaced by `ToCall` that defines APRS version and
its specialised traffic (each type can be referred to
http://aprs.org/aprs11/tocalls.txt). Typically, SSID of -1 is for Internet
gateway, -3 for [Digipeater](202410081130.md), and -9 for mobile radio.

There are generally three path types: `N-N` (can avoid congestion), `WIDE1-1`
(relay to nearby fill-in digipeater), and `WIDE2-1` (relay to mountain-top
digipeater).

**Note**: Nowadays, the data is channel to Internet via APRS-IS (Internet
Service).

In North America and South East Asia, APRS users use the frequency 144.390 MHz.
The European users adopt 144.800 MHz while some Asian countries adopt a
frequency between 144.640 to 144.660 MHz. International Space Station (ISS) uses
the frequency 145.825 MHz for APRS.
