---
tags: [security, organisation]
---

# Maconachy-Shou-Ragsdale Model (MSR)

Maconachy et al. (2001) states that information assurance is composed of
different elements including information state, countermeasure, and basic
services. States of information include **storage**, **transmission**, and
**processing**. There are three essential countermeasures, which are
**technology**, **policy**, and **people**. And five basic
[services](202209261050.md) are defined: [Availability](202210022157.md),
[Integrity](202210022154.md), [Authenticity](202210022151.md),
[Confidentiality](202210022150.md), and [Non-Repudiation](202210022159.md).

They define seven information assurance principles that enable us to implement
the MSR model. Firstly, we have to be a *business enabler* where we can do
business with other and/or generate new form of businesses with information
assurance. The policy that we formulate should shape a competitive advantage and
business confidence. The policy we introduced should be a convenience to the
staffs instead of being an obstacle. Awareness program can be initiated to
medicate this difficulty.

We have to *protect the interconnecting element* of an organisation's system in
order to not disrupt its business operation, for the management to make informed
decisions.

The solution we come up should be *cost-effective* and *cost beneficial*. Not
all information has the same value of criticality and sensitivity, thus we have
to define protection requirements proportional to its value and the associated
risk. Cost in designing, implementing, and maintenance must be considered.
Another important factor that we have to take into account is the degree of
dependency on the information systems. An organisation must establish an
information assurance program.

*Responsibilities* and *accountability* must be clearly established in
information assurance policy. Such responsibilities are shared among system
owners and the users (those who have access) as so all of them would follow the
procedures to ensure [Information Security](202408141946.md). This means that
planned and implemented security controls should be shared to the external
parties that have access to the system as well.

**Note**: Most of the threat are coming from internal malicious parties as they
have more privileges accesses to the information system.

We also require a *robust method* for the information assurance model to be
successful, and pay exceptional attention on interdependencies within the
information system before any secure control is implemented.

The policy have to be *assessed periodically* for constant review and scrutiny
as security requirements change rapidly. An audit or review should be performed
to determine the level of compliance to implemented controls, though there are
different models of audit and review. Security control's #performance is also
part of the assessment.

Another factor to be considered when formulating an information assurance policy
is *social obligations*. Rights enjoyed by employees and customers must be
considered when trying to reduce security risks. At one point, we have to
balance them out in order for the organisation to reach an acceptable
information assurance policy.

**Note**: It is not possible to satisfy all principles to an acceptable level,
sometimes trade off has to be made and priorities to be established.

Incapable of information assurance may result in legal or regulatory penalties,
information assets' loss, operational losses and operational risk management,
customer losses, and/or loss of reputation.
