---
tags: [security, human, management]
---

# Information Assurance On Human Resources

There are four key areas that we need to focus when we are carrying out
recruitment process in order to adhere to [Information Assurance Principles](202408141942.md).
Those are **inclusion of information assurance aspects in the job scope and
description**, **defined level of [Confidentiality](202210022150.md) or
sensitivity required**, **filling the position with suitable candidates**, and
**use of legal documents to enforce information assurance**.

A defined job scope and description should clearly state the
[scope, roles, and responsibility](202408262322.md) to eliminate gray areas adn
comply with the overall information assurance structure. It should also define
specific information assets, information assurance processes, or activities
attached to the position. Include sanctions if one failed to adhere to the
information assurance scope. An information assurance workforce framework such
as National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) can be used to provide
a common understanding among the employees. Such framework should feature
knowledge, skills, and abilities for areas such as operate and maintain, protect
and defend, investigate, collect and operate, analyse, securely provision, and
oversight and development.

Level of confidentiality or sensitivity should be defined so that employees will
have only sufficient access to perform their duties (the principle of least
privilege). We can grant the access based on two general principles, that is,
job division and employee rights restriction. Separation of duties should be
practised for a critical process to prevent compromise, breaches, or fraud and
minimise [collusion](202408312247.md). Reliance on key employees should be
limited, but if unavoidable, such things should be included in the information
assurance policy and a plan should be draft. Several standards can be referred
to for separation of duties, including Generally Acceptable Accounting
Principles (GAAP), Sarbanes-Oxley, OECD Principles, NIST Minimum Security
Controls, EU Internal Controls, and Monetary Authority of Singapore Internal
Controls (more widely adopted in financial field and followed by Malaysia
authorities).

The position placement should be based on its confidentiality level, suitable
screening, and selection methods. Several considerations should be taken into
account, e.g., aptitude testing, certifications and related ethics oaths,
employment history, financial checks, qualification of academic record and
professional experience, references from previous employment and education,
security background check etc. Screening and selection process should not
violate the regulations on collection and use of personal information and any
legislation regarding labour, credit worthiness, and employment. If personnel
recruitment agencies are involved, standard outsourcing procedures should be put
in place and applicant privacy protection requirements must be clearly defined.

There are two frequently used legally binding documents to remind employees of
their responsibilities and commitment: *employment contract* and *non-disclosure
agreements (NDAs)*. Before signing the contract, both parties must ensure that
both parties are clearly understood the document thoroughly. The employment
contract should include employee's information assurance roles and
responsibilities (on copyright, data protection rights, information ownership,
information management, and information classification), information assurance
terms and conditions are applicable beyond working hours and outside the
organisation's premises independent of data's format or system, a provision that
the terms remain in force for a specified period after termination of service or
so long as the individual holds organisational information after termination,
and the legal remedies upon noncompliance.
