---
tags: [cloud, management, business]
---

# Cloud Migration

[Cloud](202210012158.md) migration should be done incrementally to minimise the
problem scale posed during the process. It is suggested first establishing an
initial cloud computing capability, then form a coalition of cloud supporters.
After that, migrating low-risk systems first in order to nurture experiences and
technologies. If those systems have been settled down well, we can move
additional systems to the optimised environment. From now on, the migration is
complete, and we should work on continuous improvement on cloud usage.

Several concerns such as cloud policies, goals, and chosen approach should be
considered during the migration process. The cloud policies should listen to the
[inputs from stakeholders](202303251328.md) to ensure they take into account the
policies and [Requirements](202303251303.md) of the enterprise. A good cloud
policy provides a mandate and helps prevent unauthorised cloud computing
implementations. The identification of goals should follow the [SMART philosophy](202401101437.md)
while also span across the lifecycle of the anticipated operational timeframe.
Other than cloud policies and goals, we have to put weights into choosing an
approach that can lead cloud computing a success. The approach should gradually
introduce technologies that are useful for the success by following a carefully
thought logical sequence of activities. It typically comes down in first
building the business case, developing the strategy, assessing readiness, pilot
(small-scale showcase) or [prototype](202207120959.md), and lastly gain
approval.

Roadmaps should be used as it can help on guiding for early employment of cloud
computing. Dates for cloud computing operational capability should be added to
the roadmap to notify potential customers in the time when this technology is
available. Other than building on roadmaps, we should assess the current state
of the enterprise (inventory of the current [Data Centres](202210012205.md),
migration roadmap, defined system dependencies, and network infrastructure) and
what will the architecture be at the end state after full integration of cloud
computing.
