---
tags: [linux, management]
---

# SysVinit

SysVinit's program `/sbin/init` is responsible for managing runlevels and their
associated daemons or resources. Each runlevel may have multiple services or
scripts associated with them (as files in `/etc/init.d/` and `/etc/rcx.d/`).
During system initialisation, the program identifies the requested runlevel
which is defined by kernel parameter or in `/etc/inittab`, and loads the
associated scripts listed in `/etc/inittab`.

**Note**: In `/etc/rcx.d`, the filename convention defined which script is to be
killed (name started with `K`) and to be started (name started with `S`) upon
entering to the corresponding runlevel `x`.

SysVinit defines runlevel from 0 to 6. Runlevel 0 is used to shutdown the
computer, while runlevel 6 is for reboot. Runlevel 1 (sometimes identified as
`s` or single) is a single user or maintenance mode without network and other
non-essential capabilities. Runlevel 2, 3, and 4 are multi-user mode, though
runlevel 2 and 4 are not used often. Runlevel 5 is a graphical login multi-user
mode. The command `runlevel` shows current runlevel and runlevel change status.
To change the runlevel we're in, run `telinit`.

It also defines possible actions when dealing with runlevel. `boot` action will
ignore runlevel settings and execute the script during system initialisation.
`bootwait` action is similar to `boot`, except that `init` program will wait for
the script to finish its execution. `sysinit` action ignores runlevel settings
and executes the script after system initialisation. `wait` action executes the
script in the runlevel specified, and `init` program will wait for it to finish.
`respawn` action will restart the script if it is terminated. `ctrlaltdel`
action executes the script upon receiving [SIGINT](202211022108.md).

## Syntax of `inittab`

Configuration syntax of `/etc/inittab` can be summarised into
`id:runlevel(s):action:process` where `id` has a 4-character limit. One can
define the default runlevel with the line `id:x:initdefault` where `x` can be
any runlevel mentioned above except 0 and 6.

**Note**: For each change made to the file `/etc/inittab`, reload the
configuration with the command `telinit q`.
