---
tags: [radio, law, electric, cert, space, hardware, safety]
---

# Amateur Radio

Amateur radio or ham radio is a hobby of constructing, experimenting and
communicating with the use of self customised or owned radio. To operate a ham
radio in #malaysia, we have to acquire Amateur Radio Operator's Certification
and an [Apparatus Assignment (AA)](202408231257.md) or foreign licence in which
the nation has reciprocal arrangement with Malaysia.

**Note**: See exam timetable from [https://sems.mcmc.gov.my/sems/exams/examinfo].

The examination is contacted into three stages: Class C, Class B, and Class A. A
Class C operator can immediately take a Class B examination once they obtain the
certification, though to attend a Class A exam, one must operate under Class B
AA for **at least a year**. Class A operator has access to low bands, microwave
bands, and higher transmission power, if used inappropriately will impose danger
and interference to commercial, aviation, public services, wireless services
etc.

There are several legal regulations and suggestions coming from MCMC on
effectively operating a ham radio. Always listen first before transmitting,
pause between overs so that we don't interrupt or miss others' messages, and
leave space for others to join in. It is illegal to discuss politics, religion,
race, sex topics and harassing people on radio. When operating in a common
border area, the operator has to coordinate with neighbouring countries within
the coordination zones. In repeater operations, wait a split second before
talking after keying PTT, and ensure all repeaters making up the linking systems
have fully keyed up. Radio checks or tests should be done through a *dummy load*
instead of on air to minimise interference and disturbance.

**Note**: Emergency and priority traffic always has the highest priority over
ham radio traffic. Give way for them.

To ensure safety while operating ham radio, MCMC suggests that the antenna and
its support should be clear of **overhead power lines**, and in the case where
the antenna, its support, or its mast fail, no contact would be made to overhead
power lines. The antenna installed should not be easily accessible to people to
minimise the effect of interference on their body.

A secondary service must not cause interference to primary services as the
latter has priority claim on frequency interference protection. At the
same-level though, secondary services can claim interference protection from
each other. Service providers shall abide to coordination process issued by MCMC
if more than 1 primary services in the same frequency band. More on MCMC's
[Guidelines for Amateur Radio Service](https://www.mcmc.gov.my/en/resources/guidelines/guidelines-spectrum/guidelines-for-amateur-radio-services-in-malaysia)
and [Spectrum Plan](202408251428.md).
