---
tags: [cloud, virtualisation]
---

# AWS Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)

AWS EC2 provides [Virtual Machines (VMs)](202204071131.md) in the form of
instances, including virtual CPU, memory, storage, and network performance. It
is [Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)](202310311819.md). We can easily scale up
or down the number of servers (horizontal) and the size of the servers
(vertical). The underlying infrastructure is virtualised by using Xen
hypervisor.

Instances are launched from virtual machine templates or **Amazon Machine Images
(AMIs)** in AWS terminology. These templates contain information such as
template for root volume (includes #operating-system, applications, libraries),
launch permissions, and block device mapping. AMIs may come from default
setting, own templates (My AMIs), third parties (AWS Marketplace), or community
(Community AMIs). We can even import virtual machine from on-premise cloud as an
EC2 instance, which then can be saved as a AMI. However, AMI is only visible to
the [local AWS Region](202312011406.md).

There are five main instance type categories offered by AWS, that is, general
purpose instances, compute-optimised instances, memory-optimised instances,
storage-optimised instances, and accelerated computing instances. The following
table shows the instance type categories to each instance type.

Categories|Types
---|---
General Purpose|a1, m4, m5, t2, t3
Compute Optimised|c4, c5
Memory Optimised|r4, r5, x1, z1
Storage Optimised|f1, g3, g4, p2, p3
Accelerated Computing|d2, h1, i3

By default, the instances are spread across the underlying hardware to minimise
correlated failure. We can use placement groups to influence the placement of a
group of interdependent instances to boost the [network latency](202304111955.md)
and [Throughput](202304111957.md). To further optimised the network performance,
we can also enable enhanced networking such as Elastic Network Adapter (ENA,
speed up to 100 Gbps) and Intel 82599 Virtual Function interface (speed up to 10
Gbps).

We may pass in script to be run to the user data section of the EC2. This script
will be run during the initial launching phase with the root privilege. For it
to be run on every reboot, we can create a [Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME)](202211012200.md)
multipart file user data script.

By default, EC2 provides basic monitoring in which it sends metric data to
[CloudWatch](202401271302.md) in 5-minute period. We may enable detailed
monitoring if we want it to be in an 1-minute period.

Traffic into or out from the instance is control by the security group(s) which
it belongs to. [IAM role](202312131707.md) can be attached to an EC2 instance to
permit resource access, and this is kept in an instance profile.

**Note**: EC2 instance will have their own ephemeral storage called instance
store. It is useful for storing frequently changed content, but it will be
deleted once the instance is stopped.

**Note**: We can access EC2 instance's metadata in
`http://{ip-address}/latest/meta-data/`. User data can be retrieved from
`http://{ip-address}/latest/user-data/`.

There are several pricing models to be chosen from in facing of different
business scenario. These are *on-demand instances*, *dedicated hosts*,
*dedicated instances*, *reserved instances*, *scheduled reserved instances*, and
*spot instances*. On-demand instances are available in AWS Free Tier, and have
the lowest upfront cost and the most flexible as they have no upfront
commitments and long-term contracts, which is great for short-term, spiky, or
unpredictable workloads. Dedicated host price model allows a physical server
with EC2 instance capacity fully dedicated to the customer. Dedicated instances
are instances that run in a [VPC](202401042139.md) on hardware that's dedicated
to a single customer. Reserved instances allow the reservation of compute
resources for 1-year or 3-year term with lower hourly running costs, and it is
suggested for workloads that is consistent and heavily used. Scheduled reserved
instances reserve capacity that recur on a daily, weekly, or monthly basis, with
a specific duration, for 1-year term. Spot instances enable the bidding on
unused EC2 instances which may lower the costs since the price is fluctuates
with the supply and demand, but the applications deploy on the instances must
tolerant interruption with a 2-minute notification.
