---
tags: [devops, cloud]
---

# AWS Well-Architected Framework

AWS Well-Architected Framework provides an infrastructure design guideline that
can be concluded in six pillars: **operation excellency**, **performance
efficiency**, **reliability**, **cost optimisation**, **security**, and
**sustainability**.

Operational excellency pillar focuses on the ability to run and monitor systems
to deliver business value, and to continually improve supporting processes and
procedures. AWS defines five design principles for operational excellency:
perform operations as code, make incremental changes, review and improve
operation procedures frequently, prepare for failure, and learn from all
operational events and failures. Four best practice areas should be concerned
while considering operational excellency, which are organisation, prepare,
operate, and evolve.

Security pillar focuses on the ability to protect information, systems, and
assets while delivering business value through risk assessments and mitigation
strategies. AWS defines seven design principles for security: implementation of
a strong identity foundation (the principle of least privilege and separation of
duties), enable traceability, apply defence in depth, automate security best
practices (as code), protect data in transit and at rest, keep people away from
data, and prepare for security events. Six best practice areas should be
concerned while considering security, which are security, IAM, detection,
infrastructure protection, data protection, and incident response.

Reliability pillar focuses on ensuring a workload performs its function
correctly and consistent when it's expected to. AWS defines five design
principles for reliability: automatic failure recovery, test recovery
procedures, scale horizontally to avoid single point of failure, stop guessing
capacity, and manage change in automation. Four best practice areas should be
concerned while considering reliability, which are foundation, workload
architecture, change management, and failure management.

Performance efficiency pillar focuses on the ability to use IT and computing
resources efficiently to meet [System Requirement](202303251324.md) and to
maintain that efficiency as demand changes and technologies evolve. AWS defines
five design principles for performance efficiency: consume technologies as a
service, deploy systems in multiple geographical areas, use severless
architecture, experiment more often, and consider mechanical sympathy (solution
aligns with needs). Four best practice areas should be concerned while
considering performance efficiency, which are selection, review, monitoring, and
tradeoffs.

Cost optimisation pillar focuses on the ability to avoid unnecessary costs. AWS
defines five design principles for cost optimisation: implement Cloud Financial
Management, adopt a consumption model, measure overall efficiency, stop spending
money on undifferentiated heavy lifting, and analyse and attribute expenditure.
Five best practice areas should be concerned while considering cost
optimisation, which are practice cloud financial management, expenditure and
usage awareness, optimise over time, manage demand and supply resources, and
cost-effective resources.
