---
tags: [hardware, caching, performance]
---

# Hardware Prefetching

Hardware prefetching, assuming in a single threaded sequential access
environment, is able to reduce the [L2 cache](202403191017.md) access time in
anticipation of the usage of consecutive memory regions. It is triggered if two
or more cache misses happen in a certain pattern like succeeding or preceding
cache lines. The processor should be clever enough to recognise the size of
strides (number of memory location between beginnings of successive array
elements) and doesn't fetch unnecessary cache lines if the element size is
smaller than the prefetch window (usually 516 bytes). Each level of cache may
own or share a prefetch unit that is responsible for pattern recognition.

However, hardware prefetching **can't cross page boundaries**. Even if it can,
in the event when the next page is not resident or valid, a page fault will be
hit, and it will take a toll on the program's performance plus it increases CPU
logic complexity. Frequent hardware prefetching will also degrade the overall
performance as it can waste the Front Side Bus's (FSB) bandwidth.

**Note**: Cache misses caused by page boundaries should be instead solved by
optimising [data layout](202407191014.md).

Accidental hardware prefetching is hard to avoid. One solution to this is to
change the code or data layout, but even then it doesn't do much. Depending on
the [processor manufacturer](202403151651.md), there might be some localised
solutions such as `ud2` instruction in x86 and x86-64 architecture.

Forced prefetch will be initiated when the element is known to be in L1d cache.

Despite the advantages, hardware prefetching may work in disadvantages in random
access environment which degrade the overall performance as the working set size
increases. This phenomenon scales worse proportionally to the randomness of the
access or the arrangement of the array's elements.

In Intel processor family, we can modify the Model Specific Register (MSR) to
partially or completely disable hardware prefetching if one suffers from
bandwidth exhaustion or premature cache evictions. This can be done through
modifying `IA32_MISC_ENABLE` variable in the kernel space by bit 9 (disable
hardware prefetching altogether) or 19 (disable adjacent cache line prefetching
only).
