---
tags: [cloud, management]
---

# Capacity Management

We have to manage the IT services' and IT infrastructure's capacity to ensure
that they are the right size for the current and future
[requirements](202311291026.md) in a cost-effective and timely manner. This
includes monitoring the performance, estimating the capacity, and triggering the
reallocation of resources. Another activity that is important in capacity
management is **capacity planning**, in where we have to determine the optimal
capacity of resources.

Capacity management can be done in reactive based on event occurrences (may lead
to "ping pong effect", that is unstable demand), proactive (cyclic, event based,
or prediction based), or hybrid manner. In the [Cloud](202210012158.md)
industry, ad hoc methods following threshold-based rules calculated from one or
more metrics are adopted by several corporates such as Amazon Auto Scaling,
Autoscaling Application Block from Azure, Scalr, and RightScale. Despite its
popularity, because of the capacity oscillations, it can lead to system
instability. Furthermore, low-level or infrastructure performance metrics such
as CPU utilisation cannot clearly reflect the [Quality of Service (QoS)](202209282057.md)
provided by a cloud service or show whether the performance meets
[User Requirement](202303251328.md). It is also difficult to map high-level
metrics to low-level metrics. From the academic, several approaches are
discussed such as *queuing networks* (using queuing theory), *reinforcement
learning* (Markov decision process), and *linear and constraint programming*.
