---
tags: [hardware, memory]
---

# Dynamic RAM (DRAM)

DRAM cell contains 1 capacitor, where the transistor guard the state access and
the data line (DL) as output. The architecture is shown as below:

![Dynamic RAM](pic/dram.png)

Despite DRAM cell being simpler and smaller than SRAM cell, the capacitor
charges decay which needs [constant recharge](202403142044.md) and this recharge
can't happen instantaneously, in which this phenomenon is called leakage. Data
line must connect to the amplifier for the data to be recognised by the
computer.

Memory location selection is done through virtual address first, then translated
into physical address for memory controller to choose the corresponding RAM
chip. Parts of the physical address are passed in the form of a number of
address liens to select individual cell. For small capacity RAM chips, this
approach to doable, and they can encode address as binary number using smaller
set of address lines. The address passed to the chip must be demultiplexed
first, where $N$ address lines will result in $2^N$ output lines. These output
lines are then used to select cell.

**Note**: The number of address lines directly affect the cost of memory
controller, DRAM module, and DRAM chip.

This implementation, however, is not scalable for larger RAM chip where the
*size of demultiplexer* is exponentially directly proportional to the number of
input lines and *the cost of additional data pins* due to the increase of
address lines. In addition, there are more simultaneous-transmitted impulses to
be handled.

The solution to control the size of demultiplexer is to organise the memory cell
into rows and columns, and be controlled by a demultiplexer (Row Address
Selection, RAS) and a multiplexer (Column Address Selection, CAS). Note that
multiplexer has no distinctive functional differences with demultiplexer, it's
just that it will be the demultiplexer when memory write issued. When reading,
RAS is first to select a whole row of cells, then CAS is to be responsible to
select the specific content. There are several complications though, such as
delay specification after signal before data can be made available (due to
leaking), weak signal, and data length specification when write after RAS and
CAS is done to successfully store the new value into the cell (due to leaking).

To reduce the need of data pins for RAM module (collection of RAM chips), one
can multiplex the address by transfer it into 2 parts: row address bits, which
will be active until revoked, and column address bits. In this way, we only need
2 external address lines, with the addition of few lines to indicate when RAS
and CAS signals are available. Those are small price that can be compensated.

When measuring the performance of a DRAM module, we have to consider several
constraints such as $t_{RCD}$ ($\overline{RAS}$-to-$\overline{CAS}$ delay), $CL$
($\overline{CAS}$ latency, which depends on the memory controller's quality),
$t_{RP}$ (row precharge time), and $t_{RAS}$ (delay of $\overline{RAS}$ before
it can precharge another row). Note that precharge command can't be issued right
away as it needs to wait for the data line to finish its job, thus the need of
$t_{RP}$. All discussed factors reduce the effective data rate of the DRAM
module.

**Note**: $t_{RAS}$ is usually 2 times or 3 times longer than $t_{RP}$.

A memory chip may consist of multiple banks which each contain rows, which each
contain columns. Each of them has their own individual timing constraint, and
because of their layout in the memory chip, it renders concurrent access to RAM
possible. The **length of the row** can be considered as the size of the
addressable unit of the memory. The number of rows in a memory chip shows its
total memory capacity.

Hardware or software prefetching can be used to create more overlap in timing
and reduce stall in CPU cycles while waiting to read the cell.

DRAM chips transfer memory blocks in burst mode which can fill the cache line
without memory controller's commands and the associated delay.

There are several types of DRAM module:
- [Single Data Rate SDRAM (SDR SDRAM)](202403142202.md)
- [Double Data Rate SDRAM (DDR SDRAM)](202403150636.md)
- [Fully Buffered DRAM (FB-DRAM)](202403150846.md)
