---
tags: [caching, performance, hardware]
---

# Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB)

TLB is a [CPU Cache](202403191017.md) that stores the result of
[translation](202404022105.md) of virtual address into physical address. In
other words, it is responsible for storing the mapping, at least the most
frequently accessed one, of programs' virtual address and their corresponding
physical address. Misses in TLB level can be very costly as it has to perform
page table walk. Based on the information stored inside the cache, TLB can be
categorised into instruction TLB (ITLB) and data TLB (DTLB).

Common implementation of TLB caches table tag with the help of multi-level cache
architecture. Physical address is computed by adding the page offset, which is
not cached in TLB, to the cached value, that is the table tag. We should not
rely on [Hardware Prefetching](202403210909.md) to prefetch data or instructions
as it can initiate invalid page table walk if the address is on another page.
This should be done explicitly using prefetch instructions.

CPU can't blindly reuse cached entries if there is a [Context Switch](202404141543.md),
that is the page table is changed as the translation of virtual to physical
address depends on the installed page table tree. Two approaches to solve this
problem, either **initiates a flush immediately** upon changes or **extends tags
of the TLB entries** to identified page table tree.

For the first approach, the TLB flush is restricted to entering and leaving the
kernel address space, or in virtualised system case from kernel to
[Hypervisor](202311161500.md) and vice versa, as performing a context switch
requires kernel code. If the kernel or hypervisor doesn't have to reuse virtual
address or can reuse the same virtual address (process or kernel made system or
hypervisor call), flush is only initiated if the processor resumes the execution
of a different process or kernel. However, flushing TLB is expensive as the
entire entries have to be filled out again and often or not, page tables for
kernel and hypervisor are usually don't change. Kernel code might be restricted
to a few thousand instructions that touch some new pages or a huge page during a
system call. This solution can be optimised by individually invalidate TLB
entries by comparing tags in which pages fall into the address range, where the
kernel code and data resides, only have to be evicted from TLB. This is useful
in case a part of the address space change.

**Note**: On Linux, context switching will not trigger a TLB flush as the
virtual address space is shared between the user and the kernel.

The alternative approach is to have extended tag so that kernel, hypervisor, and
individual processes can have unique identifier. This is particularly suited for
a computing environment in which it will always run multiple processes. There is
limited number of bits available for tagging, thus reuse of some identifier is
necessary, which will deem partial flush as necessary. During context switch,
two flushes are required, one for entering and one for leaving, if TLB is
without tag mechanism. With tags, calling address space's cached translation
will be preserved and translation from previous system calls can still be used.
If the memory used by the process is limited, most recently used TLB entries
could still in TLB when process get schedule again. Another benefits of this
approach surface when switching between threads is there is no TLB flush
required. AMD implements Pacifica virtualisation extensions, which is a 1-bit
tag extension or 1-bit Address Space ID (ASID). ASID is used to distinguish
hypervisor's address space from guest domains which allows the OS to avoid
flushing guest TLB's entries when the hypervisor is entered (like when handling
a page fault) or the hype visor's TLB entries when the control has returned to
the guest.

The larger the physical page size, the better the TLB performance as it can fit
in more entries and reduce the number of levels of page tree table. However,
large page size comes with the problem which it may waste memory as the memory
region used must be contiguous due to memory fragmentation. On Linux, big pages
are usually preallocated. For x86 and x86-64, page size are set to 4 kB by
default with the options of 2 MB and 4 MB. IA-64's and PPC's page size are set
to 64 kB. Moving the data that is used at the same time to fewer pages can also
reduce the number of TLB entries.

**Note**: Increasing the minimum virtual page size may cause load operation not
able to be performed as the page size is beyond the executable or DSO has
anticipated.
