---
tags: [operating-system]
---

# Co-Routines

Co-routines, aka co-operative multitasking systems, is a
[Real-Time](202403301908.md) [Kernel](202210062254.md) where when employed in
conjunction with code driven by finite state automaton (FSA), processes are
executed in a round-robin fashion. If there is only one co-routine, its
behaviour is similar to that of [Cyclic Code Structure](202404131912.md).
Co-routines typically written in a [State-Driven fashion](202404141411.md) and
requires a central dispatcher for scheduling. Thus, it has high requirement on
disciplined programming and an appropriated application. Alternatively, it can
be written in [Polled Loop System](202404131853.md) which wait for event happen
while other processing is continued.

The following code shows an example implementation of co-routines code structure:
```c
void task_a()
{
    for (;;) {
        switch(state_a) {
        case 1:
            phase_a1();
            break;      // to dispatcher
        case 2:
            phase_a2();
            break;      // to dispatcher
        case 3:
            phase_a3();
            break;      // to dispatcher
        }
    }
}

void task_b()
{
    for (;;) {
        switch(state_b) {
        case 1:
            phase_b1();
            break;      // to dispatcher
        case 2:
            phase_b2();
            break;      // to dispatcher
        case 3:
            phase_b3();
            break;      // to dispatcher
        }
    }
}
```

The communication between the processes in co-routines is achieved via global
variables, however, this is undesirable. If the programmer provides calls to the
dispatcher at known intervals, it is easy to determine the response time.
Furthermore, there is no hardware interrupts needed to implement for
co-routines.

Co-routines can achieve fairness scheduling without putting much afford. Other
programming languages like Ada and Modula-2 has built-in constructs for it.
Despite its advantages, it is rather error-prone due to the delegation of
responsibility to relinquish the CPU at regular intervals to programmer.
Processes cannot always be broken down into uniform size phases, which will
result in varying response time.
