---
tags: [networking]
---

# Asymmetric DSL (ADSL)

ADSL is a variant of [Digital Subscriber Line (DSL)](202208312036.md)
technology. It utilises [Frequency Division Multiplexing (FDM)](202209091327.md)
to divide [Local Loop](202304041948.md) bandwidth into 3 regions, 1 region for
Plain Old Telephone Service (POTS) and 2 regions for data communication.

**Note**: There is a frequency gap between POTS and data communication to
prevent interference.

ADSL doesn't guarantee data rate since it depends on the line condition. The
farther away the subscriber is from the cable office, the lower the data rate it
might be. Nonetheless, theoretically, ADSL has a downstream data rate of 8.448
Mbps and an upstream data rate of 640 kbps (effective data rate of 576 kbps
since 64 kbps are reserved for control channel). ADSL2 downstream data rate is
roughly 20 Mbps.

ADSL is an adaptive, that is when a pair of ADSL modems is powered on, it probes
the line between them to find its characteristics. They agree to communication
using the technologies optimal for the line. This adaptiveness is thanks to the
implementation of Discrete Multitone Modulation (DMT) that combines FDM and
inverse multiplexing techniques. FDM in DMT is implemented by dividing the
bandwidth into 286 frequencies or sub-channels, which 255 of them are for
downstream and 31 of them are for upstream (2 upstream sub-channels are reserved
for control information). Separate modems are run on each sub-channel, each has
its own modulated carrier.

**Note**: The carrier is spaced at 4.1325 kHz to prevent electromagnetic
interference between signals.

Two ends of the line asses the signal quality based on [Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR)](202210290953.md)
and select the appropriate modulation scheme for the situation. Normally, the
higher the SNR the frequency is, the modulation scheme selected will need to
encode more bits per baud (symbol rate).
