---
tags: [memory, performance, cache]
---

# Level 1 Instruction Cache (L1i) Optimisation

To utilise [L1i](202403191017.md) and improve its overall performance, we have
to reduce code footprint in order to minimise [conflict miss](202407211220.md),
ensure linear code execution without pipeline bubbles (holes in the execution in
[Instruction Pipeline](202403292159.md) when waiting for resources) cause by
jumps, and code alignment.

One of the examples of reducing code footprint is by reducing the working set's
size by splitting unnecessary `struct` field into their own `struct`. We could
also use the compiler flag `-Os` to optimise the code size, which is
particularly recommended if the compiler can't take advantage of loop unrolling
and [Inline Function](202205171916.md). Additionally, the size of the program's
binary plays a far more significant role in optimising performance as it
utilises cache more efficiently despite the frequent use of indirections.

Block reordering, with the compiler flag `-freorder-blocks` or `-O2`, helps in
increasing cache utilisation if the code is lopsided, that it is often leading
to one condition which could results in bubbles due to jumping. There are two
solutions to this: either recompile and lay out the code blocks according to the
output profiling or using `__builtin_expect()` function. `__builtin_expect(EXP,
C)` accepts two parameters which are the conditional expression `EXP` and the
likely return value `C`. **Note** that `-Os` doesn't support block reordering. 

**Note**: Although jumps could disrupt the execution flow in the pipeline,
resulting in the reliance of branch prediction (BP), nowadays, modern
[CPU](202403151651.md) is capable of optimising BP in such a way that the target
of jumps can be determined as far ahead of the jumps as possible. Therefore,
jumping instruction should not be a big issue.

Code alignment should be done in strategic places, including at the beginning of
the functions, basic blocks that can be reached only through jump, and loops
(though not always a good idea), to have a sequential instruction stream.
Putting instruction at the start of a cache line maximises the prefetch of the
cache line and increase the decoder's effectiveness. The first two code
alignment method `-falign-functions=N` and `-falign-jumps=N` align all functions
or basic blocks to next power-of-2 boundary greater than $N$ to create a gap of
$N$ bytes that is filled by a series of no-op instructions. Another way to do
this is with `.align` pseudo-op in assembler. However, it is not recommended if
the functions or the blocks are small or their execution are infrequent. Dealing
with loops, the compiler flag `-falign-loops=N` can do the job, but due to the
nature of loops where they are usually follows other code sequentially, the gap,
if they have any, can't be completely dead which will result in performance hit.

**Note**: Drepper speaks against the use of `-falign-labels` that align the code
at the beginning of each basic blocks since it can slow down the program.
