---
tags: [security]
---

# WLAN Security Concerns

[Wireless LAN (WLAN)](202302161710.md) lacks built-in security to protect
connection sessions. Factors such as [Attenuation](202209021302.md), RF noise
and interference, and building and structural interference can affect its
security. It can be attacked by jamming or [Interruption](202209261908.md),
session hijacking, [Man-In-The-Middle Attack (MITM)](202210132201.md)
, [Remote Access Dial-In User Service (RADIUS)](202210221318.md) attack, and
[Challenge-Handshake Authentication Protocol (CHAP)](202408122229.md) attack.

WLAN is particularly vulnerable to [Interception](202209261916.md), rouge
[Access Point (AP)](202304061549.md), [Security Attacks](202209261358.md),
[authentication issues](202210040915.md), and unauthorised access. WLAN devices
are easy to find as it relies on beacons to *broadcast* its existence without
being processed by any security mechanism. Their [802.1x](202303082056.md)
parameter is publicly available for everyone to see. To workaround overcome this
shortcoming, we can use strong access and [encryption](202209281121.md) or
position AP outside of [Firewall](202301211140.md). Rouge AP, recognised as the
largest percentage in WLAN security attacks, imposes a serious threat to WLAN as
it can intercept any incoming traffic coming through it. Other security attacks
include [Masquerading](202209262114.md) and [Denial of Service (DoS)](202209262115.md).

On solving authentication and authorisation issues, we can deploy closed system
mode as it is more complex and secure with the wireless station sends Service
Set Identifier (SSID) to AP. Other solutions include MAC [Access Control List (ACL)](202302190738.md),
802.1X Port Access Control, Shared-key Authentication Message Flow, and
cryptographic or non-cryptographic authentication.
