---
tags: [cloud, networking]
---

# AWS Elastic Load Balancing (ELB)

ELB is an AWS service that distributes network traffic across multiple targets
in a single [Availability Zone (AZ)](202312011406.md) or across multiple AZs. It
scales load balancer according to the traffic changes.

AWS provides three types of load balancers: **application load balancer**,
**network load balancer**, and **classic load balancer**. Application load
balancer operates in [Application Layer](202206131856.md), ideal for HTTP and
HTTPS traffic load balancing, and improves the application security by
implementing [SSL](202212052009.md)/[TLS](202212052055.md). Network load
balancer operates in [Transport Layer](202206131837.md) which is great for load
balancing [TCP](202206151238.md) and [User Datagram Protocol (UDP)](202206151759.md)
traffic. Classic load balancer is a legacy load balancer that operates in both
layers, thus capable of load balancing HTTP, HTTPS, TCP, and SSL traffic.

To let the load balancer accepting incoming traffic, we must specify one or more
listeners (process that checks for connection requests), configured with a
protocol and port number for connections from clients to the load balancer and
from load balancer to targets. Health checks can be performed if configured,
then the load balancer will only route requests to healthy instances. An
unhealthy target will not be able to receive any traffic upon detection by the
load balancer, but will resume its operation once it is deemed healthy again.

**Note**: Registration of targets for application and network load balancer is
specified in *target groups* whereas for classic load balancer, the target is
the instances themselves.

We can monitor the load balancers from [Amazon CloudWatch](202401271302.md)
metrics, access logs on requests, and AWS CloudTrail logs on ELB API calls. The
latter two are stored in [AWS Simple Storage Service (S3)](202312132008.md).
