---
tags: [memory, data-structure]
---

# Page Table

Memory page table is responsible for storing mapped result from [Virtual Memory](202206251436.md)
to physical memory spaces, which is filled out by the #operating-system. Memory
management system (MMU) performs address translation fed with the virtual
address as parameter with few to no restrictions on its value, and it remaps the
address in a page-by-page basis.

In a na√Øve implementation, a virtual address is composed of directory bits,
which select an entry in **page directory**, and offset. Each entry in the page
direction is set individually by the OS, and contains page information like page
permission. These entries determine the physical address of the page address, in
which that more than one entry can point to the same address page. The data
structure of the page directory is stored contiguously in the memory and the
base address of this memory region is stored in special register. The index to
the page directory, in its actuality is an array of directory entries, is
implemented by appropriate bits of the virtual address. This approach will make
the page table itself too large to hold which may waste memory especially when
there are multiple processes running on the system.

The solution to the above implementation is to add in indirections, that is to
have multi-level page table with smaller offset bits. Top-level page table is
referred by a special-purpose register in CPU, and with the rest referred by its
higher level counterpart. This results in a sparse representation of a huge page
directory where the memory region that are not actually used doesn't required
allocated memory. The page table is more compact with impacting the performance
too much. For example, assuming a four-levels page table, it can provide address
space of 4kB $\times$ 4kB $\times$ 4kB $\times$ 4kB with 4kB + 4kB + 4kB + 4kB
cost. The most common design of this implementation is four-levels page table.

**Note**: The offset, in either cases, must be large enough to address every
byte in the physical page.

**Note**: Processes might need their own page table or page table tree.

The process of indexing entry throughout a multi-level page table is called
**page tree walking**. In x86 and x86-64 [architecture](202403151651.md), this
feature is implemented in hardware, whereas the others might the help from OS.
