---
tags: [organisation]
---

# Information Assurance Organisation

[Information Assurance Management Program (IAMP)](202408262318.md) can be
organised in a centralised, distributed, or hybrid style. Centralised IAMP is
more suited for smaller organisations with limited resources and budget, whereas
distributed is good for organisations that operate in multiple locations and/or
have multiple international branches and business units. Hybrid IAMP has become
more popular as it avoids redundant tasks and resource waste, where the
centralised part (management) promotes uniformity in activities while the
distributed part (execution) allows easier policy and internal regulation
enforcement.

To staff an organisation that adheres to [Information Assurance](202408141942.md)
policy, we need a clearly defined structure of the roles and responsibilities
for individuals and teams that involved in the IAMP program. The structure
includes senior management, information assurance units, [Information Security](202408141946.md)
units, [Cybersecurity](202408141950.md) units, privacy units, technology and
service providers, supporting functions, and users.

**Note**: Roles may be overlapping within unit (subunits) and/or across units.

## Senior Management

NIST defines several senior roles on establishing and enforcing information
assurance program within the organisation. They are Chief Executive Officer
(CEO), Chief Risk Officer (CRO), Chief Info Officer (CIO), Chief Info Security
Officer (CISO), Chief Security Officer (CSO), and Accrediting Official (AO).

CEO as the head of the organisation is responsible for ensuring that information
assurance management processes are integrated with strategic and operational
planning processes, senior officials provide information assurance for the
information and information systems that support the operations and assets under
their control, and the organisation has trained personnel sufficient to assist
in complying with the information assurance requirements.

CRO holds the risk executive functional role in an organisation, meaning that
they are responsible for the common risk management resource for all
stakeholders. They have to establish risk management roles and responsibilities,
develop and implement an organisation-wide risk management strategy, manage
threat and vulnerability information, establish organisation-wide forums to
consider all types and sources of risk, determine organisational risk based on
the aggregated risk, provide oversight for the risk management activities,
develop a greater understanding of risk with regard to the strategic view of
organisations, establish effective vehicles that serve as a focal point for
risk-related information communication and sharing among stakeholders, specify
the degree of autonomy of subordinate organisations permitted by parent
organisations, promote cooperation and collaboration among accrediting
officials, ensure that security decisions consider all factors necessary for
mission and business success, and ensure shared responsibility for supporting
organisational missions and business functions.

CIO is the head of information systems and information management who decides
the organisation's approach to IT use, adoption, and operational risk
management. They have to designate a senior information security officer to
ensure proper implementation of security controls, develop and maintain
information security policies, procedures, and controls, oversee personnel with
significant responsibilities for information security, assist senior
organisational officials concerning their information assurance
responsibilities, and coordinate with other senior officials to report at least
annually to the CEO or board of directors on the overall effectiveness of the
information assurance program. With the support of CRO and CISO or CSO, they
have to work closely with AOs to ensure an organisation-wide information
assurance program is effectively implemented, information assurance
considerations are integrated into programming, planning, or budgeting cycles,
enterprise architectures, and acquisition or [System Development Life Cycle (SDLC)](202303251030.md),
information systems are covered by approved security plans and are accredited,
information assurance-related activities required across the organisation are
accomplished in an efficient, cost-effective, and timely manner, and centralised
reporting of appropriate information assurance-related activities.

**Note**: We may designate independent CISO and CSO from the CIO if possible.

CISO is responsible for serving as the primary liaison for the CIO to the
organisation's AOs, information system owners, common control providers, and
information system security officers. They have to possess professional
qualifications required to administer the information security program
functions, maintain information assurance duties as a primary responsibility,
and head an office with the mission and resources to assist the organisation in
achieving more secure information and information systems.

CSO oversees the CISO directly or through an indirect reporting structure for
information assurance related to information systems, physical [Security Controls](202408221618.md)
coordinate with the CISO and CRO, and personnel security coordinate with HR,
CISO, and CRO.

AOs are accountable for the information asurance risks associated with
information system operations through the information assurance accreditation
process. They are responsible for ensuring that all activities and functions
associated with security accreditation are carried out. They also approve system
security plans, memorandums of agreement or understanding, and plans of action
and milestones to determine whether significant changes in the information
systems require re-accreditation. They can deny [Authorisation](202210221159.md)
to operate an information system. Or, if the system is operational, they can
halt operations if unacceptable risks exist.

## Information Assurance Units

An information assurance unit directs, coordinates, plans, and organises
information assurance activities organisation wide. It suggests strategy to
implement controls to protect internal information and those that are supplied
by external parties. It investigates ways that information assurance-related
technologies requirements, processes, and organisational structures are applied
to achieve the goals of the organisation's strategic plan.

Within the unit, there are generally four roles with different responsibilities:
information assurance control assessor (IACA), information assurance engineer
(IAE), information assurance architect (IAA), and information systems security
officer (ISSO). IACA is responsible for conducting a comprehensive assessment of
the [Management](202408221623.md), [Operational](202408221625.md), and
[Technical](202408221627.md) security controls to determine the overall
effectiveness of the controls. IAE is responsible for conducting information
system assurance engineering activates. IAA is responsible for ensuring that the
information assurance requirements necessary to protect the organisation's core
missions and business processes are adequately addressed. ISSO is responsible
for ensuring that the appropriate operational assurance posture is maintained
and as such works in close collaboration with the information system owner.

## Technology and Service Providers

Technology and service providers supply information assurance consultancy,
services, and products. Examples of technology providers are programmer, help
desk, database administrator, system or network administrator, and information
systems or business analyst.

For programmers, they have to develop systems or #software in accordance with
specification set and ensure that secure programming practices are observed.
Help desk act as a first liner in attending to users' complaints and
security-related incidents. They escalate the security incidents to the
information assurance unit for further review or investigation. Database
administrator have to implement access control for databases, take part in user
access management, implement controls to ensure [CIA Triad](202408141947.md)
within the database, and monitor database activities to track potential security
violation or performance issues.

For system or network administrator, they have to configure a system and network
in accordance with security specification set by the information assurance unit
and do system patching and updating. Information system or business analyst
plays the most important role in information assurance among technology
providers. They have to ensure that adequate controls are implemented during the
application development life cycle, security requirements are incorporated
during system design and development, and include suitable controls in all
proposed information system solutions.

## Supporting Functions

Other department such as physical security or facility management or property
management unit, HR, audit, legal department, risk management unit can help in
ensuring information assurance.

Physical security, facility management, or property management unit is
responsible for developing and enforcing appropriate physical security controls
with input from information assurance management adn other relevant parties.

HR department is responsible for conducting screening and background
investigation for an identified position, coordinating and providing security
training and awareness to employees, ensuring compliance with labour law and
relevant legislation, and taking part in all personnel-related matters such as
definition of terms and conduct of employment, performance evaluation, and
career path planning.

Audit has the responsibility to perform compliance checking and ensure
compliance with relevant laws, regulations, or policies, and review the
effectiveness of internal control and implementation of information assurance.

Legal department is accountable to ensure compliance with relevant regulations
and legislations, ensure security requirements are incorporated in contracts and
agreements, and provide advice on legal matters.

Risk management unit is obligated to develop a risk mitigation plan, identify
and evaluate risks inherent in the organisation including security-related
risks, responsible for contingency planning for the organisation, and review
the effectiveness of internal controls in mitigating identified risks.

## Information Owner or Steward

Information owner or steward is an organisational official with statutory,
management, or operational authority for specified information and the
responsibility for establishing the policies and procedures governing its
generation, collection, processing, dissemination, and disposal.

## Information System Owner (ISO)

ISO is responsible for the [procurement](202304161643.md), development,
integration, modification, operation, maintenance, and disposal of an
information system, and for addressing the operational interests of the user and
for ensuring compliance with information assurance requirements. They are also
responsible for, in coordination with ISSO, the development and maintenance of
the system security plan and ensures that the system is deployed and operated in
accordance with the agreed-upon information assurance controls. They are
responsible for, in coordination with information owner or steward, deciding who
has access to the system and ensures that system users and support personnel
receive the requisite information assurance training.

## Common Control Provider (CCP)

CCP is responsible for the development, implementation, assessment, and
monitoring of common controls. They are also responsible for documenting the
organisation-identified common controls in a system security plan, ensuring that
required assessments of common controls are carried out by qualified assessors,
and documenting assessment findings in an information assurance assessment
report and producing a plan of action and milestones for controls having
weaknesses or deficiencies.

## Users

According to NIST, users can be classified into *users of information* and
*users of systems*. Users of information has the security responsibilities to
know their needs regarding the [CIA Triad](202408141947.md) of the information.
Users of systems has to follow information assurance procedures, attend required
information assurance training programs, and report any security problems.
