---
tags: [cloud, test]
---

# Cloud Testing

Testing in [Cloud Computing](202210012158.md) helps in saving up the system
configuration and usage cost since the testing is only run on demand or
following the schedule. The test can be done while the team is developing the
application to be deployed for [Test Driven Development (TDD)](202206201159.md),
with the additional benefit where multiple testing can run in parallel.
Furthermore, since the testing is done on the cloud, it can be accessed by
everyone that has the permission on it around the globe which encourage
collaboration among team members.

Cloud testing has several dimensions, including **elasticity testing**
**security testing**, **performance testing**, **compatibility testing**, API
integration testing**, **live testing**, and **multitenancy testing**.

In elasticity testing, we have to find out various potential resource
requirement patterns and load balancing capability, perform scalability testing
for those patterns. The testing should include vertical (sever specs) and
horizontal (number of servers) scalability. Examples of elasticity testing are
*resource acquisition or release time*, *provisioning on-the-go*, and *load
testing for Elastic Load Balancing (ELB)*.

Security testing is aimed to test against access control, possible rouge users,
multitenant [Database](202302101139.md) #security etc. These test cases may
include *traversal vulnerability*, *user access/roles*, *identity federation
management*, *communication latency over [Secure Socket Layer (SSL)](202212052009.md)*,
and *multitenancy penetration*.

For the performance testing, the QA team should test the accuracy of data in the
cloud including its [Latency](202304111955.md) and
[Throughput](202304111957.md), the behaviour of the platform and applications
for resiliency, integration with third-party components, and even longevity
testing. It includes *deployment time*, *multitenancy*, *time to genesis*,
*connectivity and reliability with third parties*, *reliability and
[Availability](202210022157.md)*, and *latency*.

Compatibility testing involves *accessibility testing*, *globalisation and
localisation testing*, and *compatibility for browser, platform, or device*.

Different types of user loads and multitenancy isolations have to be tested by
the cloud APIs. Security testing should be done for all APIs. API integration
testing includes *connectivity and invocation testing*, *API load testing*, *API
security*, and *multitenancy*.

Live integration testing is important for disaster recovery and operability
under maintenance or upgrades. Examples for it are *disaster recovery*, *live
upgrade testing*, *self-healing ability*, *availability and business
continuity*.

Doing multitenancy testing to ensure that issues is isolated in as fewer
instances as possible. Testing such as *multitenancy penetration*, *rigid
failure containment*, *availability and business continuity*, *risk of
correlated behaviours, and *service transition activity analysis* should be
done.
