---
tags: [radio, planning, policy, politics, networking, communication]
---

# MCMC Spectrum Plan

Details on MCMC spectrum plan shown on the [official site](https://www.mcmc.gov.my/en/spectrum/spectrum-management).

The general understanding on the allocated spectrum characteristics is that the
lower the frequency (in cm), the larger the bandwidth (in Hz), the smaller the
antenna size required.

For a 23 cm band (UHF), it has a bandwidth of 1240 MHz to 1300 MHz, allocated as
secondary services. The operators typically use small antenna which yield high
gain with good penetrative power (good if used inside buildings). However, it
has a rather short range.

70 cm band has a bandwidth of 430 – 440 MHz which is allocated as secondary
services. It is commonly used in the form of [mobile](202303292141.md) and
handheld (compact) in indoors circumstances. Like 23 cm band, it has a limited
range. Great to use within large cities. The band can be extended with Repeater
System or Linking Repeater System.

2 m band has a bandwidth of 144 – 148 MHz, allocated as primary services. This
band is particularly common to be used by Repeater System or Linking Repeater
System. It is very compact, which is suited for mobile or handheld devices. It
can range few kilometres with a power of 5W, with theoretical maximum range up
to 20 km. Combined with Repeater System, with a transmission power of 25W, it
may reach 100 km or more depends on the height of the antenna.

A 6 m band has a bandwidth of 50 – 54 MHz which is allocated as primary
services. It is a high solar activity-dependent (except for FM mode), meaning
its range is directly proportional to solar activity especially for SSB. FM mode
of 6 m band on the other hand provides a consistent range of tens of kilometres.

10 m band has a bandwidth of 28 – 29.7 MHz which is assigned for primary
services. Its range depends on solar activity like 6 m band where during high
solar period (with 10W transmission power) it can achieve global communication.
During low solar period, such communication can only be achieved during certain
day times. SSB is assigned to the bandwidth 28.3 – 28.5 MHz, CW is typically
assigned to bandwidth lower than 28.3 MHz (between 28.07 MHz and 28.12 MHz), and
FM and AM is assigned to bandwidth higher than 29 MHz.

The three bands, 17 m (18.068 – 18.168 MHz), 15 m (21 – 21.45 MHz), and 12 m
(24.98 – 24.99 MHz), are also solar activity-dependent, and they are allocated
as primary services. Contact can be made regardless despite these bands might be
crowded.

The 20 m band with 14 – 14.35 bandwidth, assigned for primary services, is the
most utilised spectrum for [Amateur Radio](202408231247.md) communication as it
is easier to work with. It is usable during low solar period albeit weaker.
Modes that can be used in this band are SSB voiced, CW, PSK, RTTY, SSTV etc.
