---
title: "What Is To Be Done? Burning Question of our Movement"
authors: Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
year: 1901
date: 2023-07-21 13:20
tags: [literature, philosophy, socialism]
---

Lenin warned about the increase opportunistic tendency in German
Social-Democratic Party (SDP) due to the rising of Bernsteinism and stated that
he rejects any kind of class conciliation. He criticised the Russian
Social-Democrat newspaper Robocheye Dyelo of defending Bernsteinism by allowing
"freedom of criticism", thus making those opportunistic opinions shielded from
criticism and hindering individual opinions. He worried about the domination of
such opportunism will lead to the elimination of revolutionary socialist
thoughts on legal publication in Russia.

Hereby, he introduced Economism, a political philosophy believes that trade
unionist should carry only economic struggles whereas the Marxist should merge
with liberals for political struggles. Lenin believes in no eclecticism
(arbitrary selections) in principle formulation, meaning there should be no
bargaining and concession over the theory as the theory is important to advance
the social movement and avoid confusion among the proletarian. Engels stated, he
quoted, there are three sides of struggles: theory, politic, and practical
economy (resisting capitalists); and each struggle should be advance
systematically and in harmony.

Lenin saw the early 19th strikes as trade unionism without the guide of
revolutionary theory from the intelligentsia. He argued that mass spontaneous
movement won't be able to produce or advance socialism, the responsibility lies
upon the conscious element of the movement, that is the party. If such element
doesn't try its best to win over the mass over other bourgeois ideology, the
mass will instead follow the latter as it is more developed comparing to the
former. Ultimately, economic struggles are essentially tied, though not
necessarily inseparable, to the political struggles. When Robocheye Dyelo
programme that stated mass movement will determine the tasks, it means that the
mass movement should be placed before the theoretical, political, and
organisational tasks without being subservient to the mass movement itself.
Mostly important, as Lenin warned, that socialist movement shouldn't fall into
tactic-based movement.

Instead of treating political struggle and economic struggle separately,
revolutionaries, he argued, should work in close organic contact with the
proletarian struggle, that is keeping up with the spontaneous movement with
current political events, while being not afraid of ahead of the masses in
theurgical theatre. Therefore, we should not just confine yourself in exposing
the system, we have to react to the immediate and current interest of the
proletariat. The workers must learn to respond to all kinds of tyranny,
oppression, violence, and abuses regardless of their affected classes. In other
words, we have to learn from concrete to above all from topical political facts
and events, and observed other class in intellectual, ethical, and political
life. Not only that, we should practice the materialist analysis. This kind of
guidance could only come from a well-organised party.

Abuses exposure is the start of awakening class consciousness as it is an
instrument for disintegrating the system, but it should not be the only way in
which the revolutionaries should be active in. Political exposure is also
critical for the cause of the revolution and political agitation should not be
applied exclusively on basis of economy. The so-called "lending the economic
struggles itself a political character" only aims to push legislative and
administrative reforms, ultimately a reformism movement. In fact, such struggle
with economic condition focus alone will not bring about the political
consciousness. This run to the danger in which the ruling class may win back
working class's confidence by passing the reforms. Instead, revolutionaries
should push for proletarian immediate and revolutionary, complete political
demands at the same time, even if it runs into pushing for liberal struggle. The
organisation of comprehensive political exposure is the basic condition for the
political agitation expansion.

Workers are the first to learn the political knowledge, and the most capable
forces of pushing the demands.
