---
title: Organizational Questions of the Russian Social Democracy
authors: Rosa Luxemburg
year: 1904
date: 2022-08-13 17:48
tags: [philosophy, socialism, literature]
---

Luxemburg noticed that the differences between the underlying conditions for the
German and Russian proletariat: while German workers suffered from Bismark's
anti-socialist policies for many years, nevertheless lie on the ground where
bourgeois society was flourishing and was highly developed. In contrast, the
autocracy efforts to prolong its regime rule in Russia resulted in a weak
bourgeois political force. This gave the ongoing effort from the [Social Democracy](../202204211120.md)#,
pushed by Menshevik, Bolshevik #lenin and Social Revolutionaries, a
democratic-revolutionary character, but at the same time set in the challenge
for the Socialist to spread to the class awareness by themselves as there were
no intense class antagonism resulted from capitalism.

There is no objection from Luxemburg that Social Democracy is inherent
centralism, as local and group interests are set aside, in favour of the class
interests of the proletariat. Because of this, the socialist revolution is
inherently different from those from Jacobin and Blanquism as it comes from the
mass instead of coming from the top.

She critiqued the Lenin's work, One Step Forward, Two Steps Backward, as plain
Blanquism as it requested the total submission of the working mass to the party
Central Committee and the separation of revolutionary elites from the mass
instead of lending autonomy to the masses to mobilise the resources available. It
has the danger of trying to control the wide revolution into a narrow movement.
She argued that revolutionary parties played little role in the development of
the revolution, as made evidence of the spontaneous action of Russian general
strike of 1908 in St. Petersburg. Instead, the main role of the party is to
consolidate the gains from the mass, to preserve the fruit of the struggles.

Luxemburg further elaborated the concept of discipline is not about obedience to
the top, it's the discipline of proletariat to consciously act according to
their class interests. This requires the extirpating the old obedience and
servility. Therefore, the subordination to the Central Committee is inherently
contradictory. Instead, from what Luxemburg observed, the impactful changes were
initiated by the spontaneous actions from the mass, not by any central
organisational organs. She argued that the existence of a guiding centre will
certainly widen the differences between the aggressiveness of the masses and the
cautiousness of the party.

The party should not focus on the preparation of a set of directives for future
policy, but to encourage a correct historic appreciation of the forms of
struggle corresponding to the given situation and to maintain an understanding
of the relativity of the current phase and the inevitable increase of
revolutionary tensions as the final goal of class struggle is approached. Its
constitution will be corrected in practice if it possesses the political
mobility, loyalty to the principles, and concerns for unity, instead of
requesting submission to a rigid set of regulations.

Luxemburg pointed out the distrust of intellectual from Lenin were not
necessarily the most revolutionary Marxist thoughts, instead it had an
opportunistic tendency. The relationship between the opportunism and
intellectuals as well as decentralisation could be seen in Western Europe was
due to the social element "intellectual" that emerged out from the bourgeoisie,
thus more prone to opportunist tendency, plus the nature of parliamentarism at
the time. The bourgeoisie that flocks to the party have to take over it by the
means of destroying its nature of acting as a bulwark of defending the class
movement, that is to dissolve the active, class-conscious sector of the
proletariat. It is where the autonomist born. She criticised Lenin of applying
his principle blindly, disregarding the underlying political circumstances. In
the case where the labour movement is weak and futile, extreme centralisation
will ultimately lead to the power handed over to power-hungry intellectual
elite. Trying to stop bourgeoisie intelligentsia flocking into the party during
the initial phase of labour movement via the means of party constitution is
naive due to the effect of social causes. In contrast, she argued, we should
assimilate those elements into the labour movement.

Centralism and disciplines can only be implemented when there is a strong,
politically educated proletarian nucleus class in order to safeguard any
opportunistic tendencies. But even then, the labour movement by its own nature
is a mass movement where each participant expresses their will against the
ruling class. Luxemburg sees opportunism as a natural by-product of the
progression of labour movement, so if the party tries to stop it from being
existing, it will only cause harm.
