---
title: Prisoners of Geography
authors: Tim Marshall
year: 2015
date: 2023-04-05 08:31
tags: [literature, geography, politics]
---

Marshall observed that geographical factors such as physical boundaries
(mountains, rivers, forests etc.), climate, demographics, cultural regions,
natural resources etc. are often overlooked in geopolitical analysis. Even after
much advancement in technologies, these factors are not eliminated from
influencing national interests and decisions.

## Russia

Looking at the example of Russia, it faces west towards the European plain
stretches to France, which lies its upmost interests in securing its position.
Since Poland has a relatively narrow corridor, controlling Poland could allow
Russia drives forces to prevent advancement into its heartland. However, this
could bite back strategically as the border is stretch far beyond any nation
ability to defend all of them (about 2,000 miles or 3,218 km). Even with this
drawback, the strategic depth of the Russia from this point is too large for a
nation to invade, as seen in the example of Napoleon campaign to Russia in 1812
and Operation Barbarossa in 1941, where the logistics problems became too much
to handle. Nevertheless, it is true that most invasion to Russia were mostly
coming from the North European Plain by Poles in 1605, Swedes in 1708, France in
1812, Crimean War in 1853, and German in 1914 and 1941. Because of the flatland
nature of the European Plain that is not protected from mountains, desserts, and
with few rivers obstacles, Russia resorted to aggressive defence stance:
consolidating the home region, and moving outwards. Such geopolitical thinking
is at nerve especially after the collapse of Warsaw Pact and the creeping in to
former soviet republics from North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) and
European Union (EU). Looking to the far east, it is protected by uncultivated
tundra, and even if the opponents could get as far as Ural Mountains, massive
logistic problem due to large territory (75% area of Russia) and long supply
line can be hardly ignored by any invading nation. Despite this fact, Russia
itself has a small and declining population (144 million, only 22% in Siberia)
due to low birth and life expectancy, short agricultural season that pressures
equitable distribution, and little railway networks except Trans-Siberian
Railway and Baikal-Amur Mainline. It is hard to project power to Mongolia and
China because of its long supply line and lack of manpowers. The author
predicted that parts of Siberia might eventually come under China cultural and
political control by taking advantage of Russian depopulation and Chinese
emigration.

There is a perpetual warm-port seeking plagues the Russia national decision.
Ports such as Murmansk in Arctic freezes several months, and Vladivostok in Sea
of Japan freezes around 4 months, not mentioning that Japan dominated in that
maritime area. Due to this fact, it prevents Russian fleet from projecting its
power globally and makes it nervous of the lost of potential fleet holding. For
centuries, it sought to control Constantinople (now Istanbul) and even gain
access to the Persian Gulf. This explains why Russia decided to act boldly to
annex Crimea from Ukraine when it felt that Ukraine was getting closer to EU or
NATO in 2013-4 to secure Sevastopol, even it is restricted by Bosporus Strait
(controlled by NATO member Turkey and abided to Montreux Convention 1936). It is
unimaginable for Russia to lose Crimea, but an acceptable loss to the West. Even
if it can bypass the Bosporus and now having a limited supply naval base in
Tartus, Syria, Gibraltar (controlled by NATO member UK) and Suez Canal
(controlled by Egypt, a US ally) are still major obstacles to Russian fleet. To
increase its Black Sea naval capacity, Russia builds up Novorossiysk despite its
nature of not being a deep port. If feasible, controlling Moldavia can guard
against the Black Sea plain corridors and strengthen Russian grip on the
maritime region, but forcing into Moldavia can be costly due to the crossing of
Dnieper and the use of Odessa as staging post which might trigger severe NATO
reactions. The possible counteract from the US can be boosting Romanian naval
power and relying on Turkey power on the Black Sea. On the other hand, Baltic
Sea fleet faces an enormous predicament to break through the Skagerrak Strait
(controlled by NATO members Denmark and Norway) and later the GIUK gap
(Greenland, Ireland, and UK).

**Note**: New development on the expansion of NATO included Finland as part of
its member in 4th April 2023, which put Gulf of Finland mostly under West
control. This puts Baltic Sea fleet in a detrimental disadvantage.

The trump card of Russia, other than the nuclear missiles, is its vast energy
reserves, particularly gas and oil. In fact, major players in EU like Germany
and Poland have heavy reliant on Russian energy to power up their winter needs.
Now, there are four pipelines to supply European countries' energy: North
Stream, Yamal Pipelines, Blue Stream, and Turk Stream. It is interesting that
there was once a plan to build a gas pipeline supplying Bulgaria, Serbia,
Greece, Hungary, Slovenia, Austria, and Italy, named South Stream. Before its
cancellation in 2015, most of these countries refused to condemn Russian
annexation of Crimea. The further east we look at the European continent, the
more reliant of them on the Russian natural gas and oil, especially those of
Baltic States (Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia) and Finland. It doesn't help that
most of the Baltic States have a substantial amount of Russian minorities that
are currently being underrepresented and discriminated by, and the fact that
Baltic States present as a weak link of Russian defensive line. We can't rule
out the possibility that Russia might one day uses the same excuse on those
states to rescue ethnic Russian, written in Russian law, as on Ukraine. Moldavia
is in no better economic situation as like its European fellows rely on the
feeding from Russian energy and additionally export of its crops and wine to
Russia. More threatening to the Moldavia security concerns is the existing
separatist movements of de-facto independent Transnistria which is pro-Russia as
its demographics are mostly consists of Russia ethic group. It can be a
deterrent to Moldavia from joining EU and/or NATO. The US trying to pull EU away
from its reliant on Russian energy by the means of liquefied natural gas (LNG)
exportation and its terminal infrastructures. Additionally, there are also
existing LNG terminals from North Africa and Middle East to compete with Russian
gas and oil. If things get worse, Russia always has the alternative to seek
sales in China.

You might notice that there is no mention of Georgia geopolitical importance to
Russia since it was invaded by the latter in 2008. Fortunate to Russia, because
of the aftermath of Russo-Georgian War, it successfully knocked out Georgia from
being a threat, with the addition of its alliance to Armenia and the fact that
Georgia lie south of the natural boundaries of Caucasian Mountains. Unless
Georgia is getting too close to the Western power, Russia should lie its focus
westward. Russia will try its power to meddle in South America, Middle East
(albeit with declining influences since the end of the USSR), Arctic, and
Greenland to compete with US in geopolitical theatre. Such attempt could be seen
in the Mediterranean exercise in May 2015 with China where both parties with
mutual interests: China tried to extend its naval power reach, and Russia
deterred Greece from threatening its base on Tartus, Syria.

**Note**: The relationship between Armenia and Russia might be becoming
increasingly stiffen due to its inaction during the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War
in 2020. It might again force Russia to reconsider its strategy in Caucasian
region.

**Note**: Marshall concluded that the fall USSR was due to the combination
effects of its overstretch, poor financial management, not people-oriented
economic system, and the defeat in Afghanistan.

## China

Coming to the geography of China, it adapts the attack as defence strategy same
as Russia to reach natural barriers like Tibet Plateau, Gobi Desert, and
Xinjiang in order to protect its heartland, North China Plain, lies between the
Yellow River and Yangtze River with rich agriculture. Especially the Tibet
Plateau, it plays an important role in fixing China geopolitical problem, such
that its annexation avoid major powers like India to move in and threaten
Chinese heartland. Tibet Plateau gives a height advantage and the control of
sources of Yellow River, Yangtze River, and Mekong River to any player to
project their power. Gobi Desert, though historically a troublesome terrain for
Chinese dynasties to deal with nomad threats, has become a buffer as any huge
mobilisation can be detected in early stage due to the advancement of modern
reconnaissance. Add into difficulty to the aggressors, there are few roads for
heavy armour manoeuvre and few habitable areas which imposes a long supply lines
for them to enter Inner Mongolia. To further secure its geopolitical position,
China tries to pull Mongolia into its sphere of influence via trading with the
benefits of getting its minerals. This left two geopolitical weakness on the
North of China: Russia's Far East and Kazakhstan. Though Russia and China have
become good partners to resist United States' military powers, it is in nature
an alliance of convenience. In fact, due to the sanctions, Russia becomes the
junior partner of China, and its Far East increasingly falls into the influence
of China as the continuous migration Manchuria residents into the Far East. Now
coming to the border with Kazakhstan, it is simply not a threat as Kazakh and
Russian don't impose a significant threat to China since attacking it requires
long supply line from Russia even though there are weak spots in between deserts
and mountains. Xinjiang now acts as a buffer to the heartland, albeit its
turbulence nature due to its Muslim Uighur population resistance to the
integration. But China is nervous about the possible independence of Xinjiang
since it has plenty of fossil fuel resources and nuclear testing sites, and it
is a key of "One Belt, One Road" initiative connecting to its deep-water naval
base in Gwadar, Pakistan. Looking to the south, the border is secure by Burma's
mountainous terrain and Laos's hilly juggle that are difficult to launch a
massive military campaign from there. The border with Vietnam remains a
manageable problem for China as it doesn't provide many geography features to
protect Vietnam from army aggression as Chinese military powers grow.

**Note**: Vietnam has to either cling to US to seek protection from China or get
close to China to avoid possible clashes.

As the Western powers, primarily the British Empire and Russia Tsardom, came
into contact with China, coastal cities become increasingly important due to
switching focus on agriculture to trading. After decades of development, there
is a wide wealth and life quality gap between the coastland and inland cities.
More depressing fortune for the latter cities that lies on rich soils, 40% of
arable land are polluted or has thinning topsoil suitable for farming due to
industrialisation efforts, which could threaten the food production in China.
This is an undesirable but at the same time necessary measurement taken by the
Chinese government due to one sole factor: Its burden to govern over 1.4 billion
people. If the unity of the whole country doesn't be enforced, China may crumble
like its historical predecessors. Thus, the integration of territories consists
of minorities and the promise of economic progress must be prioritised over
autonomous local decision-making and democracy. The former could be seen from
the Community Party of China (CPC) incorporation of Tibet assets by bring in
modern infrastructures, such as railway system and highway, into the plateau,
which also attracts immigration from Han people into the region. It's the same
case as in Manchuria (where the Machu people have been successfully integrated
into China) and Xinjiang. But just like in Xinjiang, this could escalate the
ethnic tensions there amid increasing appearance of Han people and their
cultural domination in the region and eventually explodes into ethic conflicts
like Uighur unrest in 2018. Coming back to the economic progression, if CPC
can't keep up with their promise to grow their economy, resulting in a stagnant
economy, the conflicts between the countryside and urban will resurface, and the
resentment over the government may rise across the country.

Nevertheless, the security over the land makes China confident in focusing its
efforts to develop its blue-water navy in order to project power other than its
coastline, that is guarded by green-water navy. The author predicts that China
could rival US naval power in 2045. Its ambition can be seen on its claims over
the Ten Dash Line (includes Taiwan) with the purpose to control the most
important passageway in South China Sea albeit at the cost of reefing the
relationship with its maritime South East Asia (SEA) neighbours. It aims to
become a two-ocean naval power that secure its trade route in Pacific and Indian
Ocean. First, let's discuss the main problem of accessing to Pacific Ocean from
the Chinese perspective: the first island chain. Most of the choke points are
controlled by US ally, Japan, including the Sea of Japan, La Pérouse Strait
between Russian Sakhalin Island and Japan Hokkaido, and Ryukyu Islands. Even if
Chinese blue-water navy could somehow pass through the north-western choke
points dominated by Japanese navy, Kuril Islands still impose a difficult
passage to the Pacific Ocean as the contentious territorial disputes between
Japan and Russia is undergoing and exacerbated due to the waning power
projection of Russia to the Sea of Okhotsk. To the west, China disputes the
ownership of the Senkaku Island or Diaoyu Island in an attempt to break through
the chain, but US and Japan military presences in Okinawa in Ryukyu Islands
remain a deterrent for the Chinese navy. The weak link of the first island chain
is Taiwan, in which the Chinese government sort to gain control over it via soft
power via trades and tourism. In addition, China has an operational advantage in
supply and response time as its mainland possession has only 140 miles or 225 km
away from Taiwan versus US's 6,400 miles or 10,300 km. Therefore, gaining
control over the East China Sea air superiority is a primary objective for
Chinese successful strategic deployment and may be a heat point in the future.
Looking at the Indian Ocean, we immediately see that Malacca Strait imposes a
choke point for China to reach the energy-rich Persian Gulf. Adding worse to the
matter, Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries are not
necessarily in a good term with China due to their claims over the South China
Sea. China approaches this disadvantage with a combination of carrots and sticks
tactic to sway those countries to give in their grasp on the Sea and the Malacca
Strait. By carrots, we mean trade deals and tourism. By sticks, it means
increasing militarisation of South China Sea by turning the rocks into islands
with military facilities such as port and runway, and threats. There are
attempts from China to bypass the Strait entirely by establishing deep-water
ports in Burma, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka, in which the most important
ports are in Pakistan and Burma. To further cut its reliance on Malacca Strait,
it built gas and oil pipelines in Burma west coastline to link Bay of Bengal to
South-Western China, in which 80% of energy went through these pipelines to
supply its residents' and military's needs. China even goes so far to venture to
Africa to seek for minerals and precious metals. However, US and Japan are not
sitting ducks and planning to check China in Burma.

## USA

The upmost strategic interest of the USA in defence senses in to control the
Caribbean Sea, which is to control the Florida Strait and Yucatan Channel. Thus,
the alignment of Cuban government is important to the US decision maker as it is
viewed to be vital link for US to secure its trade route from Mississippi. It is
part of the reason the US attacked Spain and Cuba became the trigger of one of
the most tense Cold War powder keg in the region. Viewing from the geographical
features, we could see that Mississippi Basin is the US heartland as it has one
of the richest river systems for either farming, navigation, or trade. To invade
its heartland, the troops must pass through Canada or Mexico, either case will
force the invader having a long supply line. After securing its regional
security, the US seeks to defend its coast by building a great blue water navy
in addition of controlling valuable archipelagos or outpost. In Pacific Ocean,
those are the Guam, Hawaii, and Okinawa (controlled by US ally, Japan). US
gained the western hemisphere naval base rights from the British Empire during
World War II (WW2). This is enough to deter any attempts from the Atlantic.
During the Cold War, US further secured its grasp on the Northern Atlantic power
with NATO alliance in order to stop USSR from reaching Atlantic. Some would
argue that NATO treaty has stated that the signed countries have equal say in
geopolitical matter, but in truth, NATO is ultimately answered only to the US
government and its interests. This is shown especially during and after the Suez
Canal Crisis. Utilising the bases, US can easily sway regional allies and gather
resources upon meeting regional conflicts.

The author said there are three possible challengers, where two of them has
their limitation: European Union (EU), Russia, and China. EU is limited by its
slow integration due to strong national identity and reliance on US military
guarantee since its defence budget is low. The aftermath of the 2008 financial
crash and disastrous Libya intervention dwarf the EU ability to be an equal
power to the US. Russia, as discussed before, doesn't have a warm water port and
great enough blue navy to threaten US hegemony, thus remain to be a regional
power. Only China, the author argued, has the potential to meet the US power
projection, but even then, its military is decade behind the US. US can further
undermine Chinese influence in the SEA countries by capitalising their anxieties
on the Chinese encroachment at the South China Sea. If US could react to the
challenge from China in time, it may gain one's confidence and convince it to
switch side. The same rule applied to China.

The predicament US may face will be once US become self-sufficient in energy by
cracking fossil fuel in Alaska, the importance of the Gulf will be severely
reduced. Gulf nations including Israel might seek other alliances such as Iran
or China when US decides no longer guarantee their security. Especially for
Israel, its importance may be diminished due to the growing Asian and Hispanic
demographics in the US. Other than that, the USA have to keep the Panama Canal
open and monitor Brazil's influence in the Caribbean Sea. Unlike other
geopolitical commentator, the author argued that US will not decline since its
population is not ageing and the USA remains the top choice for immigrants.

## Western Europe

Europe has a good climate conditions that is being fed by the Gulf Stream which
brings enough rainfall and nurture the right type of soil to allow population
growth. This laid the foundation for the European countries to become the
pioneers in industrialisation as the work was possible all year round that
subsequently resulting in food surplus. Trading came as natural, town starting
to form, and the people turn their focus to ideas and technologies, not
withstanding that Western Europe is abundant of natural harbour due to major
river systems. That being said, the geographical features and linguistic regions
keep the Europe divided among multiple nation states. Furthermore, major rivers
such as the Rhine and Danube often don't meet together, thus becoming the
boundaries between states instead of acting as trading routes. The difference is
more clear when we examine the Europe from north to south. The Northern Europe
is generally more industrialised and richer compare to its southern counterpart
as the trade links were easier to maintain due to most Northern Europe countries
comprises the heartland of the Europe. While looking at the south, they have
fewer coastal plains suitable for agriculture and suffer more natural disasters
than its northern counterpart. For example, Spain is hindered by the narrow
coastal plains that have poor soil, short rivers, and Meseta Central. Another
instance such as Greece has steep cliffs along its coasts with few wide fertile
valleys for agricultural purposes. Moreover, Greece is reliant on the Aegean Sea
which directly competing with Turkey influence.

Though the concept of "a closer Europe" is the ideal of the European Union, its
geography and ethnography hinder the practicality of implementing such idea. The
cracks between the member states widen after the 2008 financial crisis and
migrant crisis which eventually brought the Brexit in 2020. Stricter border
control in Schengen Area among the nation states and the rise of the far-right
parties further weaken the foundation of the EU. Additionally, the conflicts
between the member states regarding their national interests unveil as the EU
becoming more destabilised. To compete with Turkey, Greek government spends more
in military budget than it should in order to protect its sovereignty over 1,400
islands. Therefore, it felt offence when Northern European countries insisting
on imposing austerity measures on its national budget. Poland is rather
suspicious of German intention, and rather locked it inside the EU and NATO like
France, partner with British and later Hungary. Poles government relies on the
USA to confront possible Russian aggression from the east. France has to protect
its weak point at the northeast (the North European Plain) as most of its
heartland are protected by the Pyrenees on the south, Alps on the southeast, and
Atlantic on the west. At the same time, it is reluctant to become a junior
partner with Germany in the EU. The UK objective is to prevent an overwhelming
dominant power on the continent, for it a French-German alliance or Russia. It
is blessed by good farmland and plenteous of fish stocks, and can trade with
other continental countries with the protection of being an island. Its vital
interest lies on the GIUK gap and the English Channel, and its grip on these
choke points wane as its naval power continue to erode. It is the reason UK is
so afraid of the independence of Scotland as it may not only hamper the nation's
prestige, but also its geopolitical position. As for Germany, since the
establishment of the EU and the end of the Cold War, it becomes an economic
powerhouse on the continent, but wary of rearmament due to the memories of WW2.
There is no German Question (two front wars) as the front with France is solved
by the alliance of being a member state in the EU. This left with Russia, but
due to German government interests of maintaining its economic power projection
(third-largest goods exporters) and reliant on Russian energy, it may seek
closer ties with Russia.

**Note**: 2022 Russian Invasion of Ukraine have changed the landscape of the
geopolitical theatre in Europe as the EU felt threaten by the Russian
aggression. This may either result in a gradual increase of military budget of
EU or more reliance on the US dominant military power in the region. The far
right parties also gain more and more grounds in the national politics which may
further hinder the EU integration.

The mountainous terrain makes Balkan countries divided among themselves,
especially in the case of Bosnia. Serbia has become the natural ally for Russia
due to the influence of Orthodox religion, Slavic origin, energy deal with
Russia. Other Balkan nations are akin to the Western influence.

## Africa

Though Africa is a huge continent, its geographical features including Sahara
Desert, the Sahel, Atlantic Ocean, and Indian Ocean encourages isolation between
each other and to the outside world. Divided by the Sahel's semi-arid,
rock-strewn, sand strip of land that reach from the Gambia to Eritrea, we could
group the Africa into top third, that is Mediterranean coastline or North
Africa, and bottom two third, which has more diversity in religion, climate
features, and vegetation. There are not a lot of land features suited for
agricultural activities since they are either jungle, swamp, desert, or
steep-sided plateau plus lack of domesticable animals. Rivers such as Zambezi
doesn't provide good navigation due to steep streams, and most of them don't
connect to each other, resulting in disunity among tribes and regions. Few
natural harbours can be spotted in Africa due to smooth coastline.

Its long history of exploitation from Arabs, Turks, and the West and artificial
borders drawn by colonial powers resulted in African living in the prison of
political geography drawn by the outsider. This is especially clear in the case
of Libya where three traditional administration regions, Tripolitania,
Cyrenaica, and Fezzan are combined despite their conflicting interests. For
example, Tripolitania is more lean to trading with Southern Europe, Cyrenaica
looked to Egypt instead, whereas Fezzan is an inland region and was a
traditional nomad land. Ethic conflicts are common among the African countries,
like Sudan, Somalia, Kenya, Angola, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Nigeria,
and Mali, as their geography doesn't conform to the demographics.

DRC had a complicated history due to its vulnerable geographical position and
its diversity of ethnic groups (200 of them), thus became the battleground of
several countries' interests including Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Angola, Namibia,
Zimbabwe etc. during the First and Second Congo War (commonly known as African
Great War). Though it is rich in natural resources and has French as its
national language, it was heavily exploited by the Belgian colonial government
and lack central government, therefore immediately triggered civil wars after
decolonialism. Its neighbour Burundi also suffers Tutsi-Hutu ethnic tension in
2015. Even though Africa countries are often rich in resources, in many cases,
local population is barely part of the beneficiaries.

Egypt, when comparing to the other African countries, is blessed by its
geographical features as it is protected by deserts on three sides and
Mediterranean Sea on the north. However, they also restrict it to only play as a
regional power due to the lack of trees to project its power through navy. It is
the most powerful armed force in the region without a doubt due to US military
aids, but it is contained by the desert, the sea, and Israel. The water issue
especially with Ethiopia over the Blue Nile dam could be the future flashpoint
between two countries.

The colonial neglection of the northern region and subsequent unequal
distribution of wealth from the oil production in Nigeria creates north-south
division, especially when the northern population are mostly made up of Muslim.
Its oil income is threatened by a terrorist organisation, Movement for the
Emancipation of the Niger Delta. Islamist rebels, Boko Haram, that operates in
the north-eastern region and Mandara mountain range poses security concerns over
the nation's prosperity. For now, Nigeria is cooperating with Cameroon, Chad,
US, and France on the matters.

In contrast to its northern neighbour DRC, Angola is shielded by its
geographical features where its northern border is secured by the jungle,
southern by the desert, and western by the Atlantic Ocean. Its eastern
sovereignty act as a buffer to DRC and Zambia to protect its dense population in
the west as it is sparsely populated in mugged land. It is also the
second-largest crude oil supplier to China. Throughout its history, the civil
wars that happened in this country were merely a disguised tribe wars (Mbundu,
Bakongo, and Ovimbundu).

In East Africa, two competing nations, that is Kenya and Tanzania, are striving
for being the economic powerhouse in the region. Tanzania is building up
Bagamoyo port with the assistant from the transport lines built by South Africa.
That being said, Kenya has the oil reserves and more efficient industrial system
to be the most likely candidate for that matter. There is also an effort from
China on building port in Mombasa with the rail link to the capital Nairoboi. It
just needs some political stability in order to secure the position.

Speaking of China, Africa serves important national interests to its energy
supplies as one third of the oil imports alongside with other precious metals
like iron, copper, and cobalt are coming from there. This could be seen from its
effort on building the Benguela railway to link Lobito, DRC and Angola and
closing ties with Niger and Angola for oil supplies. If necessary, China may
establish military presence if there is a conflict between its corporates and
local population.

South Africa being the second-largest economy in the Africa Continent, it is a
regional powerhouse to be reconned with in economy, military, and population.
This is due to its advantageous geographical position of accessing to the
Atlantic Ocean and Indian Ocean, rich reservoir of gold, silver, and coal mines,
and suitable climate and land for food production. Since South Africa are mostly
composed of highland features, there is no much concern about the malaria, thus
ideal for human settlement. To maintain its dominance in the region, it sets up
several railway lines connecting between cities and nations such as East London,
Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, Durban, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Zambia, Malawi, Tanzania,
DRC (in Katanga), and Mozambique. It dominates the South African Development
Community (SADC) and constantly flirts with Tanzania, a member in East African
Community (EAC), to gain influence over the Great Lakes region.

## The Middle East

Marshall defines the Middle East as the region that include Mesopotamia, the
Arab Desert and its periphery. Due to the inhospitability of the desert, most of
the population around this area live in its periphery. Although there are enough
geographical features that could be used as basis for national boundaries, most
modern Middle East countries' borders are based on Skyes-Picot Agreement which
drew artificial lines across diverse regions. Within this area, there are
several schisms within religion especially in the case of Islam in which there
are denomination such as Sunni, Shia and its sub-denomination (Twelvers,
Ismaili, Zaidi), Alawites, and Druze, with the latter two are not recognise to
be part of Islam by dominant Sunni and Shia thoughts. The author argues that the
conflict in this region is essentially down to tribal conflict due to religious
and ethical differences.

Islamist's terrorist groups like Al-Qaeda and ISIS grow out from colonial
exploitation and the failure of the delivery of prosperity or freedom by
pan-Arabism. Though able to gain support around the globe, it met fierce
resistance from non-Sunni and minorities alike, and even the local due to the
jihadists national background. Recently, its influence has been suppressed by
US, Russia, French, and British. However, they are successful of exporting those
jihadists across the globe which might become the powder keg that could threaten
national or even international security.

Iraq, in the author eyes, is merely a loose geopolitical entity that includes
different geographical regions, i.e., Mosul, Baghdad, and Basra. Mosul and its
milieu are controlled by the Sunni-dominated Kurds, Baghdad by Iraqi Sunni, and
Basra by Iraqi Shia'ite. Such entity was never stable to begin with even with
"strong man" accompany by the suppression of Kurds, Saddam's dictatorship, and
the suppression of Shia Muslim in 1991. In the case of Kurds, they retain the
control the region around Mosul despite al-Anfal genocide in 1988, and even able
to rose up during the Gulf War. However, its power is being checked by the
neighbouring Syria, Turkey, and Iran due to significance Kurd minority in those
countries. And even without all of that, there will be a competition for the
national leadership with the Rojava Kurds who reside in north-eastern Syria.
Coming to Iraqi Sunni, they don't control any strategic resources such as oil
like Kurds and its southern counterpart which comprises mostly Shia Muslim, thus
will not have economic independence if separatism grows. The Sunni Triangle,
that is east of Baghdad, west of Ramadi, and north of Tikrit, has more common
those in Syria than Kurds and Iraqi Shia'ite.

Lebanon, once under the French flag alongside with Syria, has serious
demographic issues due to its diverse population. The Maronite Christians were
once the ally to the French colonial government, which obviously deem become the
hostile target for the local Muslim majority. Most cities' population are
largely compose of Sunni Muslim, except for Beirut and Beqaa Valley, in which
Hezbollah Shia'ite dominate to support Syrian Shia'ite. Notably, Tripoli has a
sizeable Alawite population which raises tensions between the religion and the
local Sunni Muslim. The demographic issues are so sensitive that there is only
one census was done in 1932 and a civil war broke out in 1958.

There exists the same tensions between Sunni and Alawites in Syria, with the
addition that the latter also became the ally to the French colonial government
in the region. Al-Assad family, the dictatorial dynasty in Syria, is coming from
the Alawite background. Syria has become a battleground for several regional
powers such as Russia, Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar.

In Jordan, due to the refugees coming from Palestine, Syria, and Iraq, it faces
a demographic issue in order to integrate them into the country, not
withstanding the possible infiltration into the north-eastern city of Zarqa by
jihadists.

Moving the camera to Israel/Palestine region, the wars and the oppression from
several Arab states within their boundaries such as Egypt, Jordan, and Syria
give rise to the Palestinian identity. Although Jerusalem wields little
geographical advantages, it has significant in both cultural and religious
senses. Gaza has been barbed-wired and blockaded by both Israelis and Egyptian
forces, which makes it a highly dense settlement though good in defence, a
disaster for its population. West Bank plays a vital role in securing the
Israelis coastal region due to the mountain range, which explains the aggression
from it in order to prevent any hostile forces approach from the east especially
when its heartland has hardly any strategic depth. From the south, Israel has a
peace treaty with Egypt with demilitarised Sinai served as a buffer zone for
both nations and with Jordan in addition of the protection from the Arab desert.
Despite occasional small raids from southern Lebanon and Syria's ambition to
cross Golan Heights (controlled by Israel since 1967) for sea access, those
powers don't pose a threat to Israel national security. The only concern that
Israel will have will be coming from Iranian possible possession of nuclear
weapons especially after Trump's withdrawal from the nuclear deal since 2018.
In the case if Iran has the nuclear, it is certainly that Arab countries will
try to possess their own in the region, further degrading Israel's security.
Therefore, it puts Iranian nuclear facilities under its airstrike despite it is
1000 miles or 1609 km away and the need to cross sovereign airspace.

Iran has a large national boundaries protected by Zagros, Elburz, and waters,
but due to limited habitable space, it has a rather small population, that is 78
million people, live in there. Zagros sits between the long borders between
Iran, Iraq, and Turkey, and ends almost at the Strait of Hormuz, defending Iran
from any aggression from the West. Elburz raises along the borders with Armenia,
South Caspian shores, Turkmenistan, and ends at the border with Afghanistan,
defending Iran from Northern and Eastern threats. The river Shatt al-Arab
divides Iran and Iraq national borders after the Zagros turning eastward to the
Gulf, it has rich oil reserves and acts as a buffer with its swampland and
waters. In fact, during the Iran-Iraq War started in 1980, Saddam's Iraq never
made it pass through swamp in Khuzestan, reaching the Zagros Mountains. Other
oilfields are concentrated at the north and central Iran. The reasons that Iran
remains relatively poor are mismanagement, corruption, mountainous topography,
and economic sanctions. It is difficult in building interconnected economy due
to the mountainous terrain that Iran inherited. Therefore, in order to control
its national integrity, Iran has been built with centralised state power and
utilises the power in order to control the substantial minorities within its
border to prevent possible dissent by external forces. Its strategic location in
the Gulf make it has the capability to block the strait to prevent 20% of the
world's oil supply due to its narrow 21 miles or 33.8 km wide gap. After
military threats from US were withdrawn from the region, Iran is able to stretch
its influence reaching the Mediterranean Sea through Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon.

Iranian expanding influences over the region has alarmed Saudi Arabia, resulting
in a Middle East Cold War between the two countries. However, its smaller
population albeit stronger industrial and energy capabilities making it a
leading Sunni country in the region with weak military projection. It has to
deal with jihadists in the southern border with Yemen, which is a proxy war with
Iran. Like Israel, most Sunni countries, especially Saudi, United Arab Emirates
(UAE), Bahrain, and Egypt are against Iran, going as far as to sanction
countries like Qatar that getting too close to Iran.

Turkey locates at the Anatolia or Asia Minor with 5% territory on Europe
continent, connected by the Bosporus Strait and Dardanelles Strait. Starting
from Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, Turkey was trying to stay away from Arab conflicts
as much as possible in order to bring Turkey closer to Europe, backup by the
military support that uphold the Turkish constitution. Despite the efforts, it
is still not a recognised as a part of the EU due to the concerns of human
rights (Kurds), economic efforts (possible influx of labour into European
market), and its nature of Muslim majority. The constant rejection by the
European powers' acceptance and the reluctant adaptation to secular values by
rural Turks turning Turkey going back to its traditional geopolitical strategic
thinking, that is to expand its influence over Europe, Asia, and Middle East,
especially after Turgut Özal being elected in 1989. Arab's nations are still
suspicious of economic ties with Turkey due to the fear of possible returning of
Ottoman influences on the region. Iran, on the other hand, sees as a competitor
in the region, not withstanding their opposite stance in the Syrian Civil War.
Turkish support to the Muslim Brotherhood also cool down its relationship with
Egypt after the second coup d'état by the military. Turkey and Russia also have
conflicted interests in the Black Sea, Caspian Sea, and Middle Asia despite its
reliance on Russian energy and further pipeline infrastructures that are going
to be laid down for the European import of the energy. Their relationship
further cooled down due to their opposite stance and after heated back and forth
after the shot-down of SU 24 jet fighter in 2015. Furthermore, Turkey can
further seal off Russian Black Sea fleet by the blockage on Bosporus Strait
and/or Dardanelles Strait. Its relationship with Israel is also tense since the
Islamist elites trying to utilise the antisemitism sentiment in order to gain
votes in the polls. This resulted in a triple alliance between Greece, Cyprus,
and Israel, excluding Turkey from one possible energy sources.

The Arab Spring portrayed in the western media doesn't represent the movement
fully as there are many others join reactionaries which either soured into
rioting or civil war. Often times, religious beliefs, social mores, tribal
links, and guns are more powerful than the so-called liberal ideas. It is pretty
much still be dominated by Islamism. China and India might move in if US ever
withdraw or lessen its influence in the Middle East, especially when China has
already established a prominent presence in Saudi Arabia, Iraq, and Iran.

## India and Pakistan

[Indian subcontinent](../202309061900.md) is shaped by the Hindu Kush and
Baluchistan Desert Plateau to the northwest, Karakoram Range and Himalayan to
the north and the east, Bay of Bengal to the southeast, Indian Ocean to the
south, and the Arabian Sea to the southwest. Despite its vast flatland, the
climate differences and disconnected rivers like the Ganges, Brahmaputra, and
Indus contributes to linguistic and cultural diversity.

Other than Pakistan and India, other minor powers such as Nepal and Bhutan are
in the mercy of their two neighbours: China and India. Bangladesh, despite its
rich farmland, suffers from constant flooding, and is surrounded by India, thus
heavily under the hand of Indian government.

Secular democracy and possession of major cities and financial hubs gives India
a head start, make it easier to forge a unify Indian identity when comparing to
Pakistan, which were left with an agriculture base and culturally divided
regions.

Pakistan has to face its deeply entrenched ethnic issues, as it is composed by
60% Punjabi, 14% Sindhi, 13.5% Pashtun, and 4.5% Baluchi. Sindhi population
reluctance of becoming second-class citizens, Pashtun being culturally ties with
their Afghan kins, and Baluchistan (45% territory of Pakistan) local
secessionist movements despite rich of natural gas and mineral wealth, will be
the primary concern of the Pakistan government.
