---
title: Ten Days That Shook the World
authors: John Reed
year: 1919
date: 2024-07-01 17:49
tags: [literature, history, socialism]
---

Ten Days That Shook the World records John Reed's eyewitnesses and his
experience of the October Revolution. As a socialist journalist, his method of
documenting such dramatic event in the human history is revolutionary and
insightful on the subject.

Reed pointed out that before the total defeat of the Imperial Russian Army in
1917, it has been disorganised since 1915, due to Tsar's Court appeasement
tendency, lack of arms which resulted in the Great Retreat in 1915, lack of food
in major cities, and manufacture plant's and transportation's breakdown in 1916.
These factors contribute to the happening of bourgeois February Revolution, in
which the Provisional Government replaced the Imperial Crown as a political
entity. Reed distinguishes political and social revolution, where the former
focuses on the replacement of political institution, and the latter focuses on
the improvement on social condition of the people. The clear implication here is
that February Revolution is a limited political revolution.

He argues against the doubt on the lack of consciousness of the Russian
proletariats due to the huge membership, of 12 million, of the Russia consumer
cooperative societies, which are dominated by moderate socialists, Mensheviks
and Social Revolutionaries (SR). The term *oborontsi* is referred to the
socialists that support WWI continuation, especially those from Mensheviks and
Right SR.

Reed records that although wages had been improved 500%, it was simply due to
the ruble depreciation. The prices of food and necessities had skyrocketed to
556% and 1,109% respectively. Other political reforms had also faced significant
setbacks including non-complete Army Committee reform (harsh treatment from
officer), jailed Land Committees for implementing government regulation,
black-listing and lockouts on wage labourer. Political exiles are often not
accepted to return to their homeland.

There was a fear on another postponement on the November Constitute Assembly
Election and opted for proceeding to Soviet Election, aka All-Russian Congress.
Due to major electoral defeats of Mensheviks and SR in the urban areas, earlier
Soviet election, before November Constitute Assembly, faced opposition from
major committees, and instead advocated for its postponement. Provisional
Government was also actively suppressing radical propaganda efforts from
revolutionary elements. In Peasant's Soviets, however, they were more
conservative to the revolutionary ideas due to their slow development of
consciousness and generation of agitation from SR. Reed had observed the rising
schism within SR with more prominent left SR tendencies.
