---
layout: post
title:  "My Case Against Bug 1693028"
date:   2021-03-13 22:24:36 +0800
categories: floss
---
The [Bug 1693028][bugzilla] on Bugzilla have been filed to remove the compact
density mode from Firefox with the reason that he assumes this feature gets low
engagement from the users. In order to "ensure Firefox remains simple to use and
simple to maintain", he suggests removing the compact density mode from
customise palette.

However, there is no valid statistic suggested that this feature is not being
used by Firefox user base. The only data that he is referred to is the screen
resolution report which states that 31.7% of users are running 768 pixels
height, 61.6% of users are running more than 768 pixels height and the rest of
them are running variety of resolutions including headless. That said, this data
does not indicate how many people are using compact density mode for daily
chore. His suggestion is based on a speculation which is not solid.

There is no clear evidence that personal preferences for UI especially on
choosing compact UI or loose UI is related to personal computer's screen
resolution. UI design is more related to the electronic device's functionality
that is the device's responsiveness or its accessibility (using pen or touch
screen) than to the device's screen resolution. That is the reason why website
can be display differently for different devices. For touch screen devices,
website tends to have bigger buttons but for personal computer it will focus on
displaying more texts to its user.

Enough of talking the argument flaws, why I am defending the existences of
compact density mode in Firefox?

The reason is quite simple: I want to see more website contents. By having a
larger status bar (in this case Proton), it does not really benefit my workflow.
Considering that I need to constantly browse through GitHub, GitLab, and other
various text-heavy website (even Twitter or Mastodon), it would be annoying that
the status bar is standing in the way from viewing a long paragraph or a great
number of code lines even if it is only increased by 1%. In fact, for most of
the time, we do not read from the very top to the very bottom of the display
area that the browser has offered. We are likely to scroll down if the paragraph
begins to "fall" from the centre of the screen. This means that by increasing
the status bar height, we are going to hinder our productivity by unconsciously
scrolling down more frequent due to the slight increases of the status bar, and
for the kind of person whose quite sensitive for such change, it is painful for
me to experience.

Moreover, for lots of Firefox users, the starting point for them to customise
the browser is to get into the `Customise` option that Firefox offers. That page
is a truly fascinating space for the newcomers especially if they are from
Chrome to implement their own idea on how should the browser of their computer
should be looked. Such inspiration is what driving some users to
customise their browser via sophisticated way such as userChrome.css in the
purpose of fitting Firefox into their own aesthetic. Compact density is one of
such inspirations which encourage users to do more customisations on the browser
and struggle on doing it better. Taking this feature away from the core will
demoralise Firefox user base. How can Firefox still stand out to its competitors
by saying it is giving the freedom to its users to "make Firefox your own"
while at the same time its core development team removes such important feature
of it?

I sincerely hope that my criticism can be listened by Firefox development team. It
is not the direction that this community desired.

[bugzilla]: https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1693028#c58
